http://www.pieria.co.uk/articles/interview_with_sean_mcmeekin
	**Historians have long argued about the causes of World War I. First it was Germany’s fault, then the Allies, then imperialism, then railroad timetables, then inflexible alliances, then Germany again. Most of us assume such a massive cataclysm required deep-rooted causes. Now it seems more historians are starting to see the origins of World War I as a series of miscalculations and accidents and think that war was in no way inevitable. Can you discuss the evolution of the historiography of the First World War?**

	Arguments about the origins of the First World War are as old as the war itself. Even as they were making the fateful decisions which sent Europe into the abyss, the leading statesmen of the belligerent powers had already begun “massaging” the record, with an eye on how posterity would judge them.

	...The early Cold War saw a surge in Marxist influence on the writing of history, with exciting new work done in social and economic history. Whether or not they were Marxists, historians of WWI felt the pull, looking into “structural factors” such as the arms race, the alliance system, imperialism and war aims, class interests and domestic factors. The most influential works of the era were Fritz Fischer’s Griff nach der Weltmacht (literally “Germany’s Grab for World Power”), published in 1961, and A. J. P. Taylor’s War by Timetable (1969). While Taylor did not go as far as Fischer in pointing to a premeditated German plan for war, he still faulted the Germans owing to the too-strict timetable of their mobilization (the famous “Schlieffen Plan”). 

	The convergence of opinion in this era was well illustrated in Barbara Tuchman’s bestselling popular history The Guns of August (1962). Curiously, most readers, even today, seem to think this book a chronological narrative of the origins of the war. In an editor’s note to the latest edition, Doug Grad tells us that the book chronicles “the month leading up to the war and the first month of the war.” And yet it does nothing of the kind. After sketching out the war plans of Germany, France, Britain and Russia (though not Austria-Hungary or Serbia), Tuchman skips through the assassination in Sarajevo and entire July crisis in one short paragraph, picking up her story only on August 1! Nothing could better illustrate the structuralist consensus of the era than this: a popular book on the origins of the war by a masterful storyteller which leaves out Austria-Hungary, Serbia, and all the diplomatic drama of July 1914.

	...It is only in the last decade or two that historians have rediscovered the actual events of 1914. There are two obvious reasons for this. The terrible wars in the former Yugoslavia reminded everyone of the importance of the Balkans. After 9/11, it was not so easy to dismiss the importance of the act of terrorism in Sarajevo which unleashed the furies of war in 1914. These lessons, along with the upcoming centennial, have brought forth a cornucopia of great new work on the subject. Albertini has been rediscovered; new evidence has emerged from the former Soviet Union, Eastern Europe, and the Balkans; and so historians now tell the story with much more nuance. The war may not have been an “accident,” but it was clearly contingent on various avoidable events, beginning with the assassination itself.


&nbsp;


https://books.google.com/books?id=vQF099JYW_EC&pg=PA42&lpg=PA42
	ON SUNDAY, 28 JUNE 1914, the 525th anniversary of medieval Serbia's terrible defeat by the Turks on the fields of Kosovo Polje, a young Serbian peasant named Gavrilo Princip fired two shots into the bodies of Archduke Franz Ferdinand of Austria and his wife as they toured the Bosnian capital of Sarajevo, wounding both fatally. Because Ferdinand was heir to the Habsburg throne of Austria-Hungary and a man of controversial views in his own right, echoes from the "Sarajevo outrage," as it soon came to be known, reverberated quickly across European capitals. Accusations and counter-accusations flew between Belgrade grade and Vienna, spreading from there at second and third remove to Berlin, Petersburg, Paris, and London, as a growing mountain of rumors, half-truths, and obfuscations rapidly obscured the true nature of the crime. Lies about Sarajevo continued circulating for years afterward before the truth slowly emerged.

	By now, the basic outlines of the Sarajevo conspiracy are well known and little disputed. It is clear, to begin with, that Princip did not act alone. The assassin and his six accomplices (one of whom also tossed bombs at the archduke's motorcade) belonged to Young Bosnia, an offshoot of the Black Hand ("Union or Death"), a secret organization headed by Colonel Dragutin Dimitrijevic ("Apis"), Serbia's head of military intelligence. The Black Hand had trained Princip and his fellow conspirators; provided them with guns, ammunition, and explosives; and helped smuggle them and their equipment across the border into Bosnia.


https://books.google.com/books?id=EmJODQAAQBAJ&pg=PT263&lpg=PT263
	The Russian Embassy was an important element in the context. Before and during the first Balkan war--in which the Black Hand played a conspicuous role, organizing guerilla bands behind the enemy lines--the Russians gave financial and political support to the organization


&nbsp;


https://books.google.com/books?id=Litr5ENSmfUC&pg=PA138&lpg=PA138
	...Rachkovsky was not yet the capricious master but still the plaything of others, whose dangerous games would come close to destroying him. Hauled in for interrogation by the Third Section in the spring of 1879, over his association with a certain Semionovsky who was suspected of concealing the assassin Kravchinsky, Rachkovsky was obliged to declare his true allegiance once and for all. He would, he confirmed, render the police whatever services they asked of him; his order was gratefully accepted, and he was directed to infiltrate the People’s Will without delay.

	In only a few months, concurrent with Rachkovsky establishing himself in St Petersburg, the People’s Will organisation, or Narodnaya Volya, had come to dominate the radical landscape in Russia


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Okhrana
	Among the early Okhrana agents to work alongside revolutionaries was Lieutenant-Colonel Gregory Sudeykin of the St. Petersburg Special Section, who, in 1882, set up an illegal printing operation to publish the revolutionary People’s Will with Okhrana funds. Sudeykin and his colleague, a revolutionary-turned-police-informant named Sergey Degayev, passed drafts of the publication through Okhrana censors before printing. 


https://books.google.com/books?id=hU8lHfT4F5wC&pg=393
	It was, of course, another assassin, Gavrilo Princip who, a month earlier on 28 June, had precipitated the impending catastrophe by his shooting dead of Archduke Franz Ferdinand of Austro-Hungary and his wife in their car as they drove through Sarajevo. The bloodied cobblestones of the Balkan city were a long way, in every sense, from the Sussex countryside around Brighton, where Kropotkin now lived, or the middle-class English Utopia of Hampstead Garden Suburb, to which he sent his letters to Kravchinsky’s widow, Fanny; and yet they were linked: on the bookshelves of the assassin Princip and his co-conspirators in the Serbian underground movement, two works took pride of place – Memoirs of a Revolutionary and Underground Russia. From them, and from the practical example of the old People’s Will, the Serbian nationalist movement to which Princip belonged had drawn inspiration and courage for their bid to end Austro-Hungarian rule in the Balkans and promote a pan-Slavic agenda.


&nbsp;


https://books.google.com/books?id=EmJODQAAQBAJ&pg=PT263&lpg=PT263
	...For a long time, not only the Russian military attache but the Ambassador, Hartwig, were in intimate contact with Apis. There is no suggestion that he personally pocketed any Russian funds, but the Russians looked upon him as their particular friend, if not quite their agent, and quite naturally tried to build him up in influence.
 
	...Artamonov, the military attache, continued, however, to see his Serbian colleague and friend nearly every day. It was natural enough: they were conducting a joint secret-service operation across the nearby Austrian border, with the help of a chain of Serbian customs inspectors and frontier guards who had been recruited as secret operatives of Apis. Artamonov's contribution to the operation had been to furnish some $1600--an impressive sum by contemporary Balkan standards--toward financing the clandestine network that Apis was setting up on Austro-Hungarian soil, particularly in Bosnia.

	...According to former collaborators of Apis, Artamonov was fully informed about the subversive as well as the intelligence aspects of the project

	...Artamanov admitted his close co-operation with Apis, but denied that he had been consulted about the assassination. He declared that he had been away from Belgrade on leave in Switzerland and Italy for some time before the crime was perpetrated, and to back this up, showed the Italian sleuth-historian his diary for the months of June and July, 1914. It contained no mention of the tragedy at Sarajevo. For the fateful date of July 24, there was merely the laconic note, “Austrian ultimatum to Serbia,” followed, Albertini says, by the usual statement of Artamanov’s daily expenses: “coffee-2 lire.”


https://books.google.com/books?id=vQF099JYW_EC&pg=PA46&lpg=PA46
	...While any conclusions must necessarily remain cautious, there is more than enough evidence to reconstruct a basic narrative of Russian intentions during the July crisis.

	A good place to begin is with reactions to the events in Sarajevo. There has always been something suspicious about Russian denials of foreknowledge knowledge of the assassination plot. Russia's military attache in Belgrade, General Viktor Artamonov, was out of town on 28 June 1914, giving him a convenient alibi but a strange one, considering that the whole point of Archduke Ferdinand's ill-fated visit to Bosnia was to kick off Austrian military maneuvers in Herzegovina, which would have been of great interest to Russia's official military observer in Serbia.

	...Albertini, after extensive interviews of all the principals, concluded that "Artamonov was told of the plot, if not directly by Dimitrijevic then by some other informant." Unlike Artamonov, Nikolai Hartwig, Russia's notorious minister to Serbia, was in town on 28 June, and at least one historian, L. C. F. Turner, thinks it "impossible" that Hartwig, "the constant guide and mentor of the Serbian Government" throughout the Balkan Wars, "was not consulted ... and did not have detailed knowledge of what was afoot."

	Whatever the truth about prior Russian knowledge of the Sarajevo plot, the reaction of Russian officials at the time does not suggest that the news took them greatly by surprise


&nbsp;


https://www.quora.com/To-what-extent-was-Russia-more-responsible-for-the-outbreak-of-WW1
	Of course the real test of Russian approval for the assassination was to follow. Austria, first politely, then insistently, requested a Serbian investigation of the crime, which clearly originated within Serbia. When that failed, Austria, along with Germany, turned to Russia, with the just request that Russia use its influence to prevail upon Serbia to investigate the crime. Russia’s foreign minister, Sazanov, flatly, and with provocative rudeness, refused to do so.
 
	Serbia had an absolute duty under international law to investigate any crime which originated in its territory. By refusing to do so, Serbia was intentionally instigating a war with Austria Hungary, and Sazanov knew this. Why would the Tsar’s government tolerate this action from its vassal state, if it did not want the war, that the Serbian refusal would certainly provoke?


https://books.google.com/books?id=hU8lHfT4F5wC&pg=393
	As co-signatories to the anti-anarchist pact agreed in St Petersburg in 1904, Austro-Hungary expected Serbia to mount a comprehensive investigation of the conspiracy. Equally, it required the cooperation of Russia to pressure its fellow Slavs into compliance. The Serbs’ continued reluctance to concede fully to Vienna’s demands, even as the situation gusted towards a crisis, perhaps betrayed an uneasy conscience over covert official involvement with the conspirators, if not in the plot against the archduke itself. The Serbian police, after all, had enjoyed a good relationship with the Okhrana, learning from its methods. Nevertheless, the tension might have been defused, and the archduke’s murder have resulted in nothing more than an expulsion of diplomatic hot air, or at worst a minor regional confrontation, had not Austro-Hungary prepared to enforce its will by punitive military action, and the military alliance between France and Russia set in motion the engine of wider war. For as a member of the triple alliance with Germany and Italy, the mobilisation of Austro- Hungarian forces against Serbia triggered the terms of the binding agreement that required a response in kind by the governments in Paris and St Petersburg.

	As the man whose intrigues had helped secure the Franco-Prussian alliance and the St Petersburg Pact, Peter Rachkovsky must therefore bear his own small part of the blame for the outbreak of the First World War. Though dead, his influence lingered on as the Great Powers heaved their armies into readiness in the summer of 1914, and would continue to do so for many years to come.


http://www.pieria.co.uk/articles/interview_with_sean_mcmeekin
	...French strategy in July 1914 is a bit harder to discern than Russian. Once European war seemed likely, is easy to see why President Poincaré shared the Russian goal of manipulating Britain into supporting the Franco-Russians; but it is harder to understand why his line was so belligerent in the first place. Certainly France had no interests in the Balkans worth mentioning, and so in this sense Sarajevo was just as much "pretext" in Paris as in Vienna, Berlin, and St. Petersburg.


https://books.google.com/books?id=EmJODQAAQBAJ&pg=PT287&lpg=PT287
	...A brief flashback to what had been happening behind the scenes in Vienna and in Belgrade, while the rest of Europe settled into its normal midsummer torpor, may be helpful at this point. From the moment the Kaiser had given his unconditional backing, the government of Austria-Hungary had virtually made up its mind to take some kind of military action against Serbia. The Emperor’s ministers and chief military advisers were not unanimous, however, as to its form. General Conrad wanted all-out war, with as little advance warning to the enemy as possible. Count Koloman Tisza, the influential Hungarian premier, a bushy-bearded, high-living, but exceptionally clear-thinking Magyar aristocrat, feared that this course would bring Russia in. Berchtold’s view, which ultimately prevailed, was a kind of sleazy compromise between two antithetical policies. As he told the German Ambassador on July 14, he proposed to send the Serbian government a note “so phrased that its acceptance will be practically impossible.” At the same time, the door would be left very slightly ajar to some solution short of full-scale war if the Serbian government showed last-minute evidence of reasonableness. In provoking Serbia, every effort would be made to minimize the provocation to Russia and France. For this reason the Austrian ultimatum to Belgrade would be held up until the French President had started home from his Russian visit; there would be no chance for a warlike brotherhood “being sworn at St. Petersburg over the champagne under the influence of Mrs. Poincaré, Izvolsky and the Grand Dukes.”

	A tragic accident in Belgrade may have heightened the dangers that were inherent from the first in Berchtold’s recklessly calculated risk. On July 10, Baron Vladimir von Giesl, the Austrian Minister in Belgrade who had been recalled to Vienna for consultation, returned to his post. At 9 o’clock that evening he received an unexpected call from his Russian opposite number, the redoubtable Nicolas Henrikovitch de Hartwig. The Russian Minister said that he had come to express his condolences “for the atrocious outrage” (Sarajevo), but there were undoubtedly other things that he wanted to say. What they were we shall never know. At 9:20 P.M., just as Giesl was launching into a soothing—and quite false—interpretation of Austria’s attitude toward Serbia, Hartwig suddenly slumped to the floor, unconscious. He was dead when a doctor examined him a few minutes later (he was overweight, and had suffered from angina pectoris for some years). An unpleasant scene ensued after the arrival of Hartwig’s daughter, Ludmilla. She brusquely repulsed the sympathy expressed by the Giesls, and poked about the room, sniffing at an eau de cologne bottle, and rummaging in some large Japanese vases. Her father had smoked only his own Russian cigarettes, but Ludmilla had wrapped up the two butts and put them in her bag. Had her father had anything to eat or drink? she asked with unveiled suspicion. In the tense atmosphere of the time, public rumor immediately made a poisoner of the unfortunate Giesl, who was even accused of having brought back from Vienna an electric chair which instantly killed anyone sitting in it.

	Hartwig had inside knowledge of the Serbian Black Hand and its methods (the Austrians were strangely uninformed on the subject, though the alert French Minister in Belgrade had already been able to ferret out for his government the Black Hand’s role in the Sarajevo assassinations).


http://www.pieria.co.uk/articles/interview_with_sean_mcmeekin
	...Curiously, Poincaré had taken a harder line in the First Balkan War in 1912 than Russia's Foreign Minister, Sazonov, all but urging the Russians to take the plunge and mobilize (after which, he assumed, Vienna and Berlin would mobilize too) -- so there was a recent precedent in his thinking for a Balkan pretext leading to war with Germany. 

	As for why Poincaré took such a hard line, and encouraged Russia's early mobilization -- that remains one of the great questions of the July crisis.


https://books.google.com/books?id=EmJODQAAQBAJ&pg=PT250&lpg=PT250
	...The infiltration of the police and the secret-service outlook into the higher policy-making levels of the Czarist state was no less evident in foreign than in domestic affairs. The Okhrana was particularly active in Paris, a major center of émigré revolutionary activities. It operated much as the GPU and the MVD were later to do. The chief agent was usually attached to the Russian Embassy with the rank of counselor; he rendered no accounts to the ambassador but was authorized to correspond with his chiefs through the diplomatic pouch. Co-operation between the Okhrana unit in Paris and the French Sureté was always close in the pre-war years.

	...To neutralize the chronic protest of French Socialists and Liberals against its operations on French soil, the Okhrana bribed French newspapers and journalists of the right who were willing to follow a pro-Russian line. According to an exposé of the Okhrana written in 1919 by one of its former senior officials, V. K. Agafonov, it financed a journalists’ club in Paris and paid regular subsidies to several important French newspapers, including the Echo de Paris, the Gaulois, and the Figaro. The last-named organ, according to Agafonov, for a while received 24,000 rubles—about $10,000—monthly from the Okhrana.

	When Izvolsky took over the Russian Embassy in Paris he promoted an arrangement with the French government for influencing French opinion that was more official, but hardly less conspiratorial, than the crude undercover operations of the Okhrana: the Russians would open a special credit, drawn upon the Czar’s secret funds, for the French government, which would then undertake to buy up the consciences—and the pens—of its own journalists in behalf of joint objectives. A letter sent by the Russian Prime Minister in October 1912 to his French opposite number—at that time Poincaré—pointed out one of the advantages of the proposed system: It would help keep within bounds “certain appetites and certain rivalries” in the French press which the Russians had learned from bitter experience were apt to be stirred up when they approached foreign journalists directly.

	There was another advantage that the Russian communication did not spell out but which Poincaré may have been able to read between the lines. There was another advantage that the Russian communication did not spell out but which Poincaré may have been able to read between the lines. Izvolsky looked upon the dry, little Lorrainer, with his implacable irredentism, as the heaven-sent instrument of Russian foreign policy in France—“If Poincaré were defeated it would be a catastrophe for us,” he warned St. Petersburg before the French presidential elections of 1913—and one of the secret objectives of the press campaign that Russia was proposing to finance was to combat the “pacifist”—we would say today “appeasement”—and therefore anti-Poincaré, elements in French public life. “Do not forget,” Izvolsky once wrote his nominal chief in St. Petersburg, “that Poincare has to struggle with very influential elements in his own party which are generally hostile to Russia and openly preach that France must not be dragged into any war arising out of Balkan affairs.”


https://www.quora.com/To-what-extent-was-Russia-more-responsible-for-the-outbreak-of-WW1
	Russia coordinated with its French allies in mid July, in a state visit by the perpetually belligerent President Poincarre, and significantly, without any official records being kept. Russia had already started mobilizing before Serbia had even been presented the July 23rd demarche, by Austria.


https://books.google.com/books?id=EmJODQAAQBAJ&pg=PT304&lpg=PT304
	...Even before the sheer velocity of events became intolerable, the Russian Foreign Minister, Sazonov ... had committed a momentous blunder. After the Austrian ultimatum to Serbia he obtained the agreement of the Cabinet and the approval of the Czar to the principle of a partial mobilization of Russian forces—involving a little over 1,000,000 men—along the Austrian border. This move, Sazonov argued, might scare the Austrians out of attacking Serbia, but would not threaten Germany, and in any case a soothing note to Berlin would accompany public announcement of the call-up.

	...If the Czar had stuck to his refusal not to let Russian mobilization go beyond the limited call-up in the south, peace might have been saved (although the Russian Generals had already begun surreptitiously to exceed the terms of the Imperial ukase). But between 3 and 4 P.M. on July 30, just as Bethmann-Hollweg in Berlin was drafting new instructions to his Ambassador in Vienna advising him that Germany “must decline to be drawn wantonly into a world conflagration without having any regard paid to our counsels,” Nicholas’ vacillant will suddenly buckled.

	It was Sazonov who effected this fatal result. Accompanied by a staff officer, he came to the Peterhof Palace, some 17 miles out of the capital, to try to convince the Czar that general mobilization could no longer be delayed. For more than an hour, in deferential but urgent tones, he marshaled his arguments in favor of mobilization. He had two particularly strong ones: a somewhat vague report that Germany, too, had begun to mobilize, and the arrogant tone of the Kaiser’s latest telegram declaring that he could not mediate in Vienna if Russia went ahead with the partial mobilization against Austria.

	...“Think of the responsibility you are asking me to take if I follow your advice!” he finally exclaimed. “Think what it means to send thousands and thousands of men to their death.”

	Unluckily, Sazonov’s companion, General Tatishev, chose that moment to speak up.

	“Yes, it is a terrible decision to take,” he said.

	“I am the one who decides,” Nicholas snapped.

	From then on he seemed more attentive to Sazonov’s arguments. He was particularly impressed by the Foreign Minister’s view—an erroneous one we now know—that Germany was bent on war and would go ahead whether Russia mobilized or not. At last, after what seemed a terrible inner struggle, the Czar gave in.

	“All right, Serge Dimitrievitch,” he said, “telephone the Chief of the General Staff that I give the order for general mobilization.”


https://books.google.com/books?id=hU8lHfT4F5wC&pg=393
	...Mobilisation was ordered, and the tsar’s apparent decisiveness was rewarded with the support of the country’s socialists, while pacifst dissenters had no choice but to scatter into exile. The unity of the Russian people when faced by a national challenge would, it was hoped, expect a spiritual renewal and restore respect for the tsar. The immediate effect of the mobilisation, however, was merely to provoke Germany to respond in kind.


https://books.google.com/books?id=EmJODQAAQBAJ&pg=PT314&lpg=PT314
	On August 1, at 7 P.M. Count Friedrich von Pourtales, the German Ambassador to Russia, red in the face and laboring under the nervous strain of a sleepless week, entered the office of Sazonov, whose amiable features were unusually taut. Rather brusquely the Germans asked whether the Russian government was disposed to give a satisfactory answer to the ultimatum presented by Germany the day before and timed to run out at noon. Receiving an evasive answer, he repeated his question, in a staccato voice. Once again Sazonov replied that the Russians could not demobilize, but that they were, as before, prepared to continue negotiations for a peaceful settlement. Both men were on their feet. The Count fumbled in his pocket and drew out the German declaration of war, which he read, breathing hard as he reached the final sentence:

		“His Majesty the Emperor, my august sovereign, accepts the challenge in the name of the Empire and considers himself at war with Russia.”

	Then, losing all control of himself, he ran to the window which looked out over the Winter Palace reddened by the evening sun, and turning his back on Sazonov, burst into tears. Sazonov wordlessly patted his shoulder, whereupon Pourtales burst out, “Never did I think that I would have to leave St. Petersburg under such conditions.” The two diplomats, who were also old friends, embraced each other, in the Russian style, for the last time.


http://www.newworldencyclopedia.org/entry/Assassination_of_Archduke_Franz_Ferdinand#Russian_military_attach.C3.A9.27s_office
	Serbian reservists being transported on tramp steamers on the Danube, apparently accidentally, crossed onto the Austro-Hungarian side of the river at Temes-Kubin and Austro-Hungarian soldiers fired into the air to warn them off. This incident was blown out of proportion and Austria-Hungary then declared war and mobilized its army on July 28, 1914. Under the Secret Treaty of 1892 Russia and France were obliged to mobilize their armies if any of the Triple Alliance mobilized. Soon all the Great Powers (except Italy) had chosen sides and gone to war.


&nbsp;


https://books.google.com/books?id=vQF099JYW_EC&pg=PA46&lpg=PA46
	Rounding out the picture of selective recordkeeping inside the Franco-Russian alliance, there are substantial gaps in Russia's own diplomatic correspondence with its envoys in Paris and Belgrade in July 1914, in the latter case for ten whole days following the assassination of the archduke on 28 June. Did the Russians have something to hide? The gaps in the record strongly suggest a good deal of purging took place after 1914. Missing files from Imperial Russia's Ministry of Foreign Affairs are particularly noteworthy, worthy, in that following the October Revolution, Soviet researchers had no compunction in publishing the most incriminating documents they could find in order to indict the benighted "imperialism" of the old regime.


https://books.google.com/books?id=EmJODQAAQBAJ&pg=PT263&lpg=PT263
	...There may be one man still alive who knows the whole story; the Russian assistant military attaché, Captain Alexander Werchovski, who replaced Artamanov during his absence. A friend of Werchovski, a Polish nobleman named Louis de Trydar-Burzynski, stated in his memoirs, published in Italy in 1926, that “the assassination [at Sarajevo] was perpetrated with the support of the Russian military attaché at Belgrade, Captain Werchovski...” Werchovski, he continued, “was later War Minister in the Kerensky government; he was a young man whom I had known very well for years, and he told me quite frankly the truth about the origins, preparations and execution of the plot.” Unfortunately, Werchovski, if he is living today, is not likely to tell any more about the case; when last heard of, he held a high command in the Red Army—a curious detail in itself.


&nbsp;


http://www.pieria.co.uk/articles/interview_with_sean_mcmeekin
	**So France wanted Alsace, Russia wanted the Straits, Germany had some vague desire for Lebensraum and a vague fear of encirclement, and Britain was thinking about Home Rule for Ireland. Not very good reasons to plunge a peaceful and prosperous Europe into hell. And yet, the people of Europe went to war in August 1914 with joy and brass bands and parades. Was it 99 years of peace that lulled them into war? Or an atavistic desire for violence and boredom with bourgeois prosperity?**

	Few historians still see things quite this way. There were a few parades, many volunteered to take up arms, and open opposition to the draft was rare, but the idea that the common people of Europe all marched off happily to war is no longer tenable. Entire books have been written by specialists to debunk "the myth of war enthusiasm," most recently by Mike Neiberg (Dance of the Furies. Europe and the Outbreak of World War I, Harvard 2011). Certainly many young men (most famously Hitler) welcomed the break from dull routine, the cameradie of military life and so on: but most people seem to have reacted to the war's outbreak more with trepidation and terror than bloodlust. 

	And this, mind you, is after the war began, with the national press in each belligerent already baying for blood. In its origins, the war of 1914 was almost purely a "Cabinet war," with even the invocation of "public opinion" (let alone the real thing) playing next to no role in the decisions to mobilize (with the curious exception of Russia, the least democratic and nationalist-patriotic of all the initial belligerents). 

	The fact that the war of 1914 was a Cabinet war does not make the story any less troubling, however. To me, it is, if anything, more unsettling that a conflict of such world-shattering proportions could be conjured up by such a small handful of men. 


https://books.google.com/books?id=EmJODQAAQBAJ&pg=PT263&lpg=PT263
	...Like the treason of Redl, the intrigues of Izvolsky, and the conspiratorial Witches’ Sabbath of the Okhrana, the murderers at Sarajevo demonstrate that overlaying the local power vacuum in south-eastern Europe caused by the breakup or decrepitude of the Habsburg and Ottoman Empires, there was a vacuum of responsibility affecting a much wider area. Responsible government was beginning to collapse under the strains of the modern age, just as civilization was beginning to crumble, in all the autocracies—and in some of their more-or-less democratic allies. (In the Balkans responsible government had never existed, at least not for centuries.) The breakdown, it is true, was limited; the regression to barbarism was noticeable only in certain contexts, the relapse into anarchy was confined to certain sectors. Philosophers continued to philosophize, and the plumbing, where it already existed, worked as well as ever. The trains ran—often on time—mail was delivered and taxes collected: drunkards were jailed and prostitutes had their cards stamped. Only the higher policy-coordinating centers of the state were affected. How grievously, was demonstrated, not only by Sarajevo, but as we shall now see, by the failure of the Old World diplomacy to prevent the crisis inevitably engendered by it from ending in the general European war that virtually nobody in Europe wanted.


http://www.pieria.co.uk/articles/interview_with_sean_mcmeekin
	**You have written three books about the origins of the First World War. What makes this topic so compelling?**

	The biggest draw for me as a historian is the stakes. The war of 1914 had such profound, and predominantly negative, consequences -- four years of industrial-scale slaughter all but destroying western faith in human progress, the violent break-up of empires which had endured for centuries, the bloodletting begat by the Russian Revolution and Civil War, the rise of fascism, Nazism, and all the rest. And yet the war, I have come to learn, did not have to happen, at least when and in the manner that it did. Many structural factors -- industrialization and the arms race, empires and alliances, nationalism and the spread of near-universal military service across Europe -- helped produce the carnage of 1914-1918 once the Great War broke out, but they did not cause the war, which could easily have been avoided had various contingent events, actions and reactions not transpired precisely they way they did in 1914.



https://www.smithsonianmag.com/history/gavrilo-princips-sandwich-79480741/
	...the archduke’s chauffeur, a stranger to Sarajevo, gets lost. He swings off Appel Quay and into crowded Franz Joseph Street, then drifts to a stop right in front of Schiller’s.

	...Schiller’s delicatessen stood on the original route planned for Franz Ferdinand’s motorcade; indeed, the chauffeur’s fatal uncertainty was caused by the local governor, Oskar Potiorek, shouting at him from the passenger seat that he had should have stayed on Appel Quay. In other words, Princip was standing in precisely the right place to assassinate the archduke if the Franz Ferdinand had stuck to his plans, and so could hardly be said to be the beneficiary of some outlandish coincidence.


https://books.google.com/books?id=EmJODQAAQBAJ&pg=PT304&lpg=PT304
	...If the Czar had stuck to his refusal not to let Russian mobilization go beyond the limited call-up in the south, peace might have been saved


https://books.google.com/books?id=EmJODQAAQBAJ&pg=PT287&lpg=PT287
	...[Hartwig] is believed to have broken off his originally close relationship with the fanatical brotherhood’s head, Colonel Apis, and in general, to have started putting the brakes on extreme Serbian nationalism, which he had earlier encouraged. His influence on the Serbian government was enormous; if his personal outlook on the Balkan problem had really changed as much as many historians think, his death at that crucial moment was undoubtedly a catastrophe for Europe. Giesl himself believed so. He later wrote that if Hartwig had lived beyond the “critical 25th of July,” the war would not have occurred.


http://www.pieria.co.uk/articles/interview_with_sean_mcmeekin
	**Had Gavrilo Princip missed, or had Archduke Francis Ferdinand left Sarajevo after the first failed assassination attempt (as his security detail advised), or had his driver not taken a wrong turn, would a World War broken out at some later date? In other words, was the assassination a spark that ignited an unstable international situation that would have probably exploded at some later date or can we just as easily imagine a Europe that would have remained peaceful for another 99 years?**

	This is one of the great counterfactuals of modern history. I do believe that, had Princip missed or the Archduke taken more sensible precautions for his own safety after the failed bombing attempt, nearly all subsequent history would have taken a different path. 

	...Might there have been a general European conflagration at some future point? One can never rule out worst-case scenarios, but there is nothing which would have made war any more likely than in the years before 1914, absent the precise sequence of events which transpired following Sarajevo


http://www.newworldencyclopedia.org/entry/Assassination_of_Archduke_Franz_Ferdinand#Russian_military_attach.C3.A9.27s_office 
	It could be argued that this assassination set in motion most of the major events of the twentieth century, with its reverberations lingering into the twenty-first. The Treaty of Versailles at the end of the First World War is generally linked to the rise of Adolf Hitler and World War II. It also led to the Russian Revolution, which helped lead to the Cold War. This, in turn, led to many of the major political developments of the twentieth century, such as the fall of the colonial empires and the rise of the United States and the Soviet Union to super-power status.


http://www.pieria.co.uk/articles/interview_with_sean_mcmeekin
	...My argument is not really that Russia is more responsible for the outbreak of war than the other two, but rather that the war which actually resulted in August 1914 was the war Russian policymakers preferred, not the one the Austrians or Germans wanted.

	...Whatever the merits of Bethmann's policies in July 1914, and I think they were disastrous, it is hard to escape the conclusion that the ultimate German nightmare of "encirclement" actually came true in 1914. Like cornered animals, the Germans lashed out, and they have much to answer for. But so, too, do the Bosnian Serb terrorists who assassinated Franz Ferdinand, the Austrian leaders who pushed for a war with Serbia, the statesmen in Paris and St. Petersburg who capitalized on the inept diplomacy of Berlin and Vienna to corner the Germans, and those in London who turned the European conflict into a world war. It did not have to happen.


------


http://alphahistory.com/worldwar1/russian-revolution/
	The effects of World War I gave rise to the Russian Revolution of 1917. By the end of 1916, two years of total war had placed enormous strain on all combatant nations. None felt this more severely than Russia, which had entered the war confident but in a precarious political, economic and social state. The Russian economy made great industrial advances in the two decades prior to 1914, but it was still under-developed and ill-equipped to supply a prolonged war. Russia’s government was still dominated by the tsarist autocracy, which claimed political authority that was divine rather than popular. The Russian people were already fractious, dissatisfied and eager for change. In 1905 their demands had taken the empire to the brink of revolution, before tensions were eased with promises of reform – promises that were never truly fulfilled. The Russian empire rested on what historian Orlando Figes called ‘unstable pillars’, and they were unable to sustain its involvement in one of the most intense wars in history.

	At the epicentre of this turmoil was Nicholas II, tsar of all the Russias. Most historians agree that Nicholas was not equipped for governing Russia through difficult times. He was the son of an over-bearing autocrat and the grandson of a reformer, but was himself incapable of being either. Nicholas was determined to cling to autocratic power but he was blind to the problems this created and the threats it posed to his throne. The tsar professed to love the Russian people, yet he turned the other way when hungry workers were shot in January 1905, and when striking miners were machine-gunned in Siberia in 1912. Nicholas instead blamed Russia’s troubles on others: on foreign liberal ideas, on anarchists, on trouble-makers in the universities and on Jews (like many Russian conservatives he was an embittered anti-Semite). The tsar drew his advice and counsel from an inner circle of ministers, military officers, aristocrats and bishops – but too often they told Nicholas whatever he wished to hear, rather than what he should.

	The rapid descent into war in 1914 had caught the tsar unaware. Nicholas knew the German kaiser well enough to know he was ambitious and prone to rash decisions; but he did not think Wilhelm so treacherous that he would declare war on the empire of his own cousin. Nicholas made the first of several blunders in July 1914 when he appointed his cousin, Grand Duke Nicholas Nikolaevich, as commander-in-chief of the army. Nikolaevich had military training as a cavalry officer but had never commanded an army in battle; he now found himself in charge of one of the largest armies in history. In August 1914 the tsar and Nikolaevich – aware that most German forces would be occupied with the Schlieffen Plan in the west – planned an invasion of East Prussia. It was a bold campaign that might have succeeded if not for poor planning and leadership. The two Russian field commanders, Alexander Samsonov and Pavel von Rennenkampf, were competent officers but were both over-confident and vainglorious. They were also bitter rivals who could barely stand the sight of one another. Their squabbling and inept decision-making contributed to a disastrous defeat at the Battle of Tannenberg in late August 1914. Unable to face reporting the loss of 150,000 troops to the tsar, Samsonov took his own life.

	This culture of unaccountability and military incompetence was ingrained in much of the Russian military. After a year of fighting and several costly defeats, the exasperated Nicholas II decided to personally take command of the army. In September 1915, against the advice of his ministers, he dismissed Nikolaevich and proceeded to the frontline. The decision proved telling for two reasons. Nicholas’ distance from the Eastern Front in 1914 and early 1915 had buffered him from much criticism; his generals had instead footed the blame for military disasters. Now, the tsar would be responsible for every defeat, shattering the divine infallibility that many superstitious Russians believed he had.

	...By February 1917 the situation in Russia’s cities had become critical. Shortages of food and fuel were dire: the capitol city, since re-named Petrograd, needed sixty railway cars of food a day but often received barely a third of this amount. Inflation had been so severe through 1916 that the rouble had just a quarter of its pre-war buying power. In February, when a women’s day march through Petrograd merged with angry bread queues, the unrest spilled over into revolution. Soldiers ordered to fire on the crowd refused and shot their officers instead. The tsarina’s response was dismissive, writing off the unrest as a “hooligan movement”. Things eventually became so dire that the tsar decided to return from the front – but he was halted along the way by striking railway workers. While waiting on train sidings in Pskov, Nicholas II was met by his generals and members of the Duma (the national parliament). All but one demanded he sign an instrument of abdication, which Nicholas eventually did. More than 300 years of Romanov rule were brought to an end with the swish of a pen in a stranded railway cart.

	In different times, the departure of tsarism might have paved the way for a brighter future for Russia. The Provisional Government that replaced the tsarist regime did introduce some liberal reforms, like freedoms of assembly and the press, and amnesties for political prisoners. But facing international pressure, it refused to end Russian involvement in the war. The defeats, military follies, casualty lists and food shortages continued, and after six months the Provisional Government’s popularity had slumped.


http://alphahistory.com/russianrevolution/july-days/
	Between April and June 1917, the Bolshevik party was engaged in consolidating its position, recruiting new members and building support. Of particular importance was extending Bolshevik influence in the Petrograd Soviet, where the majority was still held by Menshevik and SR delegates. Lenin’s preferred tactic was to wait patiently while the party strengthened, while continuing to attack the government with propaganda and rhetoric and to promote the Soviets as the alternative government. But events in mid-1917 were fuelling the tinderbox of popular revolution faster than Lenin would have preferred. The Provisional Government’s adherence to the war radicalised thousands of soldiers and heightened calls for a Soviet revolution. On June 18th one military unit, the 1st Infantry Reserve, drafted resolutions calling for the overthrow of the government:

		The slaughter continues and there is an industrial collapse in the making. We see the rich lining their pockets from this criminal war and we sense and know that a sinister and terrible famine is approaching. We also see the jackals from the State Duma and State Council reaching out with their filthy paws to strangle freedom. The rights of the soldier are falling by the wayside; so is the reinforcement of the rights of freedom… We hotly protest any kind of bourgeois ministry and we demand that the ten bourgeois [ministers] make way. We demand that the All-Russian Soviet of Soldiers’, Workers’ and Peasants’ Deputies seize all power.











	In October 1917 a new political force, the socialist Bolshevik Party, emerged to seize control of the nation. Led by Vladimir Ulyanov, or Lenin, the Bolsheviks promised ‘peace, bread and land’ – promises that resonated with Russian workers, soldiers and sailors. Once in power the Bolsheviks commenced peace negotiations with Germany and, in March 1918, they signed the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk, formally ending Russia’s involvement in the war. It would prove a costly peace: Russia had to surrender large amounts of territory, people and fertile farmland.




------


https://encyclopedia.1914-1918-online.net/article/eastern_front
	On 19 July, the Germans counter-attacked toward Tarnopol; the Russian formations opposing them simply vanished. The Central Powers advanced twelve kilometers on the first day of the offensive and captured Tarnopol on 25 July. By early August, the Russians had evacuated both Galicia and the Bukovina, surrendering all of the gains of 1916. In the chaotic flight to the rear, soldiers shot their officers and simply began walking home. For all intents and purposes, Russia disposed of no organized military force south of the Pripet Marshes. The counter-offensive nonetheless ground to a halt at the Galician border. Austria-Hungary had no further reserves to dedicate to the attack, and the Germans needed every available man on the Western Front. For the moment, Russia was spared.

	Ludendorff, however, was determined to drive Russia from the war and free up some of the eighty German battalions that remained on the Eastern Front. Shifting his artillery north, Ludendorff ordered an attack on Riga; if that city fell, he reasoned, the road to Petrograd would be open and Russia would be forced to conclude peace. 



https://www.nytimes.com/2017/03/06/opinion/the-february-revolution-and-kerenskys-missed-opportunity.html
	The provisional government rapidly introduced reforms that would have seemed utterly transformative in peacetime, instituting universal suffrage and freedoms of speech, assembly, press and religion, and addressing the demands of the many national minorities who made up much of the Russian empire’s population. But none of this delivered the three things the people wanted most: peace, bread and, for the peasants, land.

	Of these failures, the most important was the failure of peace. The war continued, and in April it emerged that Milyukov had sent a telegram to the British and French governments, promising continued Russian support. He lost office shortly thereafter, and the Socialist Revolutionary leader Kerensky emerged as his successor.

	Despite the obvious lessons of Milyukov’s fall, Kerensky, too, continued the war. After touring the front, he succeeded in rallying the weary troops for yet another offensive. Despite some initial successes, the Kerensky offensive stalled, with heavy loss of life, repeating the grim pattern of World War I.


http://www.bbc.co.uk/history/worldwars/wwone/eastern_front_01.shtml
	Anarchist and Bolshevik agitators played their own part in destroying the Russian Army's ability to fight. Many anti-war radicals, along with the Bolshevik leader, Vladimir Lenin, were ferried home from exile in Switzerland in April 1917, courtesy of the German General Staff (which had spent roughly 30 million marks trying to foment disorder in Russia by the end of 1917).

	The summer offensive was a disaster. Peasant soldiers deserted en masse to join the revolution, and fraternisation with the enemy became common. Meanwhile, in an attempt to restore order and resist the German counter-offensive, most of the generals and forces of the political right threw their weight behind a plan for a military coup, under the Russian Army's commander-in-chief, General Kornilov.

	...The only winners were the Bolsheviks, with Lenin at their head, who were able to topple Kerensky and take power in the October Revolution of 1917- without significant resistance from either the government or the army.



https://books.google.com/books?id=EmJODQAAQBAJ&pg=PT459&lpg=PT459
	Formal peace negotiations between Russian and the Central powers got under way at Brest-Litovsk, a railhead in western Russia then occupied by the Germans, on December 22. They were destined to leave a traumatic imprint upon the personality of the emerging Soviet power at the same time that they helped to transmit the revolutionary virus into the bloodstream of the Kaiser’s Empire.


https://encyclopedia.1914-1918-online.net/article/western_front
	Utterly unbeknownst to the high command sitting on either side of the Western Front trenches, 1918 would be the last year of the First World War. Of the two sides, the Germans were more keenly aware of the seriousness of their predicament. Despite Russia’s collapse after the Bolshevik Revolution in 1917 and the subsequent Treaty of Brest-Litovsk on 3 March 1918, the Germans were still set to lose the war if it continued for much longer. The French and British remained in the field in the millions. Worse yet, the United States had joined the war on their side earlier in April 1917. Although the Americans took a long time to enter the field, by war’s end they had, on paper, an army of 4 million men: more than 1 million more than Germany had marched to war with in 1914.





https://books.google.com/books?id=EmJODQAAQBAJ&pg=PT459&lpg=PT459
	The Russian delegation was headed first by A. Joffe, then by Trotsky himself. Both he and Lenin, despite the realism on which they prided themselves, had no realization of the trap into which they were walking. They took it for granted that the proletariat of the Western world would follow the revolutionary example of their Russian brothers within a matter of months or even weeks


https://www.marxists.org/history/etol/newspape/ni/vol02/no01/lenin2.htm
	“Reproaches have been made against me because of the Ultimatum. I put it forward only in the extremest case. When our CC members talk about an international civil war, that is a mockery. We have the civil war in Russia, but not in Germany. Our agitation is going further, but we are not agitating with words but with the revolution. And that remains. Stalin is wrong when he says that we do not need to sign. We must sign these conditions. If you do not do this, then you will sign the death warrant of the Soviet power in three weeks. These conditions do not infringe upon the Soviet power. I do not waver in the slightest. I do not put the ultimatum in order to withdraw it again. I want no revolutionary phrase. The German revolution has not yet matured. That requires months. The conditions must be accepted. If a new ultimatum then comes, we shall have a new situation.” (Lenin, Sämtliche Werke, Vol. XXII, p. 297.)


https://books.google.com/books?id=EmJODQAAQBAJ&pg=PT459&lpg=PT459
	...Bolshevik demagogy had disintegrated the Russian army as a force-in-being, and the Soviet government was virtually at the mercy of the victorious Germans. In a feeble attempt to exert counter-pressure the Bolsheviks intensified revolutionary agitation and propaganda among German or Austro-Hungarian prisoners of war held in Russia—a fateful step from the long-term viewpoint, but one without significant immediate results. Trotsky meanwhile used all the resources of his cunning to drag out the negotiations. Finally on March 3 after the German armies had resumed their advance, and were nearing Petrograd, the Soviet government accepted Ludendorff’s terms, signing away more than a quarter of Russia’s national territory and some 75 per cent of her coal and steel plants.

	The dissident Social Revolutionaries resigned from the government in protest against accepting such conditions, and the Bolsheviks themselves were badly split. Lenin had the greatest difficulty in persuading Trotsky to give up his dreams of resisting the German Army by sabotage and guerrilla warfare. The Whites in the south, encouraged by the demonstration of Bolshevik weakness and enraged by what they considered the Bolshevik betrayal of the national cause openly raised the standard of counter-revolution, with French and British support.

	By the spring of 1918 sizable White forces, led first by Alexeyev and Kornilov, then by Generals Krasnov and Anton Denikin, advanced from the northern Caucasus into the Don Basin, while Japanese military intervention in support of the local anti-Bolshevik forces began in the Far Eastern provinces. A combined British-Russian intervention force took shape on the Arctic coast at Murmansk. The Russian civil war, one of the most decisive conflicts in modem history—and also one of the cruelest—was under way. It was to rage back and forth across the former empire of the Czars—and even into some neighboring territories—until 1921, leaving famine and pestilence in its wake.




------------


------------

sleepwalkers book:


	By this time, however, over two weeks had elapsed and the Austrians were getting no nearer to Apis, the real author of the conspiracy. Looking over the witness statements, it is hard not to agree with the historian Joachim Remak that Princip, Grabež and Čabrinović pursued a strategy of deliberate obfuscation that led ‘by way of splendid confusion from initial denial to reluctant – and incomplete – admission’.46 All three took pains to limit the damage done by Ilić’s revelations and to prevent as far as possible the inculpation of official circles in Belgrade. None made any mention of the Black Hand; instead they hinted at links between Ciganović and the Narodna Odbrana, a red herring that would lead the Austrian investigators far from the true trail.


	...The shock of the event still resonates in these early reports: ‘we have still not recovered from the crushing impact of yesterday’s catastrophe’, wrote the Austrian minister in Belgrade, ‘so that I find it difficult to assess the bloody drama in Sarajevo with the necessary composure, objectivity and calm . . .’50 Vengeful rage, hostile underlying assumptions about Serbian objectives and a growing body of circumstantial evidence shaped official Austrian perceptions of the crime from the first hour, in a process that was only obliquely linked to the discoveries generated by the legal investigation itself.




on Russian mobilization:

	What tilted the Tsar towards caution on 29 July was the arrival at 9.20 p.m., just as the order for general mobilization was about to be dispatched from the central telegraph office, of a telegram from Kaiser Wilhelm II, in which the Tsar’s German cousin pleaded that his government was still hoping to promote a ‘direct understanding’ between Vienna and St Petersburg and closed with the words:

		Of course, military measures on the part of Russia which could be looked upon by Austria as threatening would precipitate a calamity we both wish to avoid, and jeopardise my position as mediator which I readily accepted on your appeal to my friendship and my help.

	Saying ‘I will not be responsible for a monstrous slaughter’, the Tsar insisted that the order be cancelled.


	...It is worth pausing for a moment to ponder on the fact that the impact of a telegram from the Emperor’s third cousin in Berlin was sufficient to stay an order of general mobilization for nearly twenty-four hours. After the revolution of February 1917, the Russian revolutionary publicist and scourge of Tsarism Vladimir Burtsev was placed in charge of the Tsar’s private papers, in which he discovered a cache of personal telegrams exchanged between the German and Russian emperors. Signing as ‘Willy’ and ‘Nicky’, the two men communicated with each other in English, adopting an informal, at times even intimate tone. The discovery of these documents was a sensation. In September 1917, the journalist Hermann Bernstein, who was reporting on the revolutionary events, published them in the New York Herald and they were reissued in book form (with a foreword by Theodore Roosevelt) four months later.



these are the telegrams:

https://wwi.lib.byu.edu/index.php/The_Willy-Nicky_Telegrams


------

https://archive.org/stream/in.ernet.dli.2015.183514/2015.183514.The-Origin-Of-The-War-Of-1914-Vol-11_djvu.txt
	This was enough to alarm Sazonov, and on 21 July Pourtalfes wrote 
to Bethmann HoUweg that 

		since Sazonov's return he has been very anxious about the relations between 
Austria-Hungary and Serbia. He told me that he had most alarming reports 
from London, Paris and Rome, where the attitude of Austria-Hungary was 
everywhere causing growing concern. , . . Sazonov seized the occasion to 
pour out once more in his usual manner his resentment against Austro- 
Hungarian policy. . . . There were, he said, powerful and dangerous forces 
at work ... to plunge Austria into war . , . namely Count Forgach ‘an 
intriguer ofthe worst sort’ and Count Tisza, a half madman. . . . Their aim 
was the annihilation of Serbia (Kaiser’s marginal note: ‘would be the best 
thing, tool’) ... If Austria-Hungary was determined to break the peace, 
she would have to reckon with Europe (Kaiser’s marginal note: ‘Nol but 
with Russia, yes!’) . . . Russia would not be able to tolerate Austria- 
Hungary’s using threatening language to Serbia or taking military measures 
(Kaiser : ‘qui vivra verra’). ‘Russia’s policy’, said M. Sazonov, ‘is pacific but not 
passive.’® 

	Sazonov’s words caimot always be taken at their full value.


Sazanov blames war on "powerful and dangerous forces" and "madmen" in Austria



------

from Hamilton and Herwig "The Origins of World War I"

Richard F. Hamilton seems iffy

other excerpts in "moltke"


	There was even less "calculation" or "slide" in the French case. With President Raymond Poincare and Premier/Foreign Minister Rene Viviani literally out at sea on the battleship France during a state visit to Russia from 16 to 29 July, a virtual foreign policy power vacuum existed in Paris. Neither War Minister Adolph Messimy nor Finance Minister Jean- Baptiste Bienvenu-Martin possessed the power to commit the nation to war. Technically speaking, the war powers rested with the president, but his orders had to be countersigned by a minister, and he could declare war only with the consent of the Senate and the Chamber of Deputies. 23 In July 1914, there was no meeting of the Council of Ministers, which had the authority to mobilize the armed forces. Nor was there a military conference at which French leaders debated the relative merits of war and peace. The professional diplomats at the Quai d'Orsay were generally anti-German; the ambassadors operated independent fiefdoms. President Poincare exercised an influence over French foreign policy far exceeding his constitutional authority, greatly influencing the selection of foreign ministers and, in the case of his close friend Maurice Paleologue, also that of ambassadors. All had come to accept three stable elements of French policy: national pride, fear of Germany, and peace through strength.


Poincare exceeded powers granted by French constitution in foreign policy, selection of foreign ministers, and ambassadors.


	The imperative of French policy in 1914, Eugenia C. Kiesling sug- gests, was simple and clear: to preserve the tie to St. Petersburg at all cost. France could not afford to "decide" whether to stand by Russia. While Premier Viviani publicly avowed that his policy was to "resolve the conflict ... in the interest of the general peace," he never- theless described France as "entirely ready to support the action of the [Russian] imperial government. " 24 France's ambassador to St. Petersburg, Paleologue, throughout the July Crisis counseled an aggressive stance on the part of France and Russia, including if need be recourse to war. On 25 July and again on 28 July, Paleologue assured Russian Foreign Minister Sazonov of "unequivocal French support." 25 Poincare's com- mitment to the Russian alliance was so firm that, in the words of one historian, he pursued it even at the cost of "connivance in dishonesty and blackmail." 26



Poincare acted like the French-Russian alliance was all that mattered and ignored everything else.


	...With strict constitutional propriety, the decision for war was made by the Asquith cabinet, with the consent of parliament. But the cabinet did not act in unison; rather, it was swayed, in the end, by a resolute minority. The prime mover was Grey, aided vociferously by First Lord of the Admiralty Winston S. Churchill. Asquith was less enthusiastic about a continental commitment, but trusted Grey's professional judgment. The rest of the cabinet eventually went along with that move toward war. In fact, Germany's violation of Belgian neutrality and Chancellor von Bethmann Hollweg's ill-chosen words about the 1839 Articles constituting but "a scrap of paper" did much to persuade them. Again, decision making by coterie.


Grey was "prime mover" for war. Hollweg's "scrap of paper" comment and Germany's violation of Belgian neutrality helped him (was that Moltke's fault?).


goes on: a push for war in Italy but prime minister rejected it (at first); Young Turk leaders in turkey signed a secret alliance with Germany Aug 2. 1914


	...Prime Minister Pashich, while recognizing that "anarchistic elements" may well have had a hand in the assassination at Sarajevo on 28 June 1914, nevertheless was reluctant to identify the Black Hand as perpetrator of the act for fear of thereby exposing the interconnection among the civilian and military decision-making bodies in Belgrade. In the end, fully aware that Serbia was still recovering from the losses of the two Balkan Wars, he decided not to go to war but, rather, to leave the onus for declaring war with Vienna. Failure to obtain clear commitments of support from St. Petersburg undoubtedly also played a role in this decision. As Richard C. Hall argues, the murder at Sarajevo "caused" nothing; rather, it was the use made of the killings, especially by Vienna, that set Europe on a course toward war. Far from "sliding" into armed conflict, Pashich, recognizing the immediacy of war, moved the government to the southern city of Nish and ordered the military to initiate basic precautions.


says Pashich acted out of fear of exposing the involvement of the Black Hand in high-levels of the Serbian government. Knew that Austria-Hungary was using the assassination as a pretext for war.


	...Beyond continental Europe and the Ottoman Empire, tough, aggressive senior decision makers also charted the course toward war. In Japan, the European war brought relief and joy. What senior leaders termed the great "confusion" would spell opportunity for Japan, an opportunity to become the "chief nation of the Orient." On 8 August 1914, the cabinet approved Japanese participation in the war alongside Great Britain. That decision was the work primarily of one man, Foreign Minister Kato Takaaki. In what Frederick R. Dickinson describes as a "complete usurpation of the foreign policy prerogative," in August 1914, Kato, after consulting with just a handful of his closest advisors in the Foreign Ministry, took the genro, or elder statesmen, completely by surprise. 40 There was no input from the public, the popular press, or financial and industrial circles. And far from being a "slide" into war, Japan's entry into that conflict was the product of the machinations of its foreign minister.



Somehow, Japan's foreign minister single-handedly gets them involved in the war.


	...Last but not least, the United States entered the war in April 1917 in large measure also because of one man: Woodrow Wilson. Having at- tempted for the first three years of the war to influence its course and outcome through diplomatic means, the president finally ran out of alter- natives after Germany's initiation of unrestricted submarine warfare on 1 February 1917.

	John M. Cooper first examines, and then rejects, the customary argu- ments of scholars that "powerful forces" such as precedent, economics, culture, geopolitics, and popular opinion brought about the American de- cision to enter the war. He suggests instead that these "powerful forces" were but "background influences" and that they acted on the side of non- intervention. Rather, "Wilson remains at the center. He and, in certain critical respects, he alone cast America's lot for entry into World War I." With Congress out of session for all but three months between August 1914 and the end of 1915, the president acted on his own, with complete faith in his enormous self-assurance.


say Wilson the one man who brought the U.S. into WWI. Congress was out of session.


	...During the war, arguments of intention, of sinister premeditation were dominant, these basically being arguments of aggressive purpose. A year or two after the end of the war, a sea change occurred and arguments of inadvertence - no one wanted war - were given increasingly wide approval. Both arguments were basically political in character, serving as an aid first in the conduct of the war, and then in the conduct of the peace. Since little serious documentation was available at that point, the actual bases of the decision making were essentially unknown. The most striking instance of the shift in usages appears in the case of David Lloyd George, who, in a less than a year, changed from a committed intentionalist to become the principal author of the nonjudgmental slide thesis. In January 1920, he demanded that Kaiser Wilhelm II be formally tried as a war criminal, perhaps at Dover Castle. Then, in December of that year, he made a famous speech in which he argued that the nations had "glided, or rather staggered and stumbled" into war. 42 As late as 1936, Lloyd George still maintained, "No sovereign or leading statesman in any of the belligerent countries sought or desired war - certainly not a European war.


Lloyd Geroge inconsistent


	...And so it was in 1914. For decades, European leaders had "gamed" the likely scenario for war on the Continent. In each case, they rejected the notion that a war could be localized or isolated. In each case, they recognized the danger of diplomatic escalation leading to armed conflict. In each case, they knew the dangers inherent in a general European war. In each case, they accepted those risks and dangers in July and August, and they decided for war with the full expectation of winning and thereby solving the difficulties that prompted them to consider armed conflict in the first place. That is what made the July Crisis radically different from previous crises, such as the two Moroccan wars, the two Balkan wars, and the Tripolitanian war.


WW1 origins "radically different" from that of previous wars


	...In fact, there was a surprising single-mindedness of purpose in the deci- sion makers of 1914. They recognized almost to a man that the strategic argument of perceived decline or threat demanded the call to arms. In short order, the murder of Archduke Franz Ferdinand receded from the forefront of their considerations. Instead, the leaders in Vienna and Berlin, St. Petersburg and Paris, persisted in their view that war alone could re- solve their perceived precarious positions in the European concert. And when two monarchs, Wilhelm II and Nicholas II, at the last moment tried to pull back from the precipice, the coteries in Berlin and St. Petersburg forced them back on course.


They all came up with the same stupid argument for war ("we are in decline or threatened and so must go to war") and forced "Nicky and Willy" into war after they tried to make peace


	...The "slide" thesis is also rendered spurious by the various actions, espe- cially in the three critical capitals - Vienna, Berlin, and St. Petersburg - to block possible mediation of the crisis. Foreign Minister Berchtold as early as 3 July boldly informed the German ambassador, Heinrich von Tschirschky, of his government's need for a "final and fundamental reckoning" with Serbia. Kaiser Wilhelm II at Berlin endorsed that ini- tiative with the terse marginalia, "now or never." Vienna refused a state funeral for Archduke Franz Ferdinand in part because such a formal gath- ering might have offered the crowned heads of Europe an opportunity to discuss and perhaps to coordinate their responses to the assassination at Sarajevo. Vienna was determined to strike out against Belgrade; Berlin seconded that initiative. And once Russia had decided to block the pro- posed Habsburg "punitive expedition" against Serbia by way of mobiliza- tion, Foreign Minister Sazonov forestalled further discussion and possible resolution of the crisis by instructing General Ianushkevich, the chief of the General Staff, to smash his telephone!


there were many moves to block mediation of the crisis from multiple sides.


	Perhaps the last words on the "slide" thesis should go to one of the pivotal players, the chief of the German General Staff. Already in March 1913, General von Moltke confided to the Italian military attache Germany's intention to violate Belgian neutrality in case of war. The next war, Moltke stated, would be between France and Germany. In brutal terms, he allowed that this war would be "a question of life or death for us. We shall stop at nothing to gain our end. In the struggle for existence, one does not bother about the means one employs." 44 And in retirement in June 1915, Moltke in a private letter to Field Marshal Colmar von der Goltz spoke openly of "this war which I prepared and initiated." 45 No drift, no slide.


Moltke admits to starting the war, plans to violate Beligian neutrality and "stop at nothing to gain our end."


	...We suggest instead that a more intelligent reading of the events of July 1914 might have caused a different opin- ion as to whether the entire Balkans were worth the bones of millions of grenadiers - Pomeranian or otherwise.



------------



ww1-oddities



------------







poincare:


https://archive.org/stream/recentrevelation01geor/recentrevelation01geor_djvu.txt
	The name of Georges Louis, Political Director of the Quai d'Orsay and later the successor of Bompard as Ambassador to Russia, is far better known after his death than during his life, for the closing scenes of his long career have become the theme of embittered controversy. His champions opened the attack with a little volume entitled Poincare a-t-il voulu la guerre? in which Gouttenoire de Toury argued that the Ambassador had been recalled because he attempted to counter-work the bellicose policy of Russian and French Imperialists.


https://archive.org/stream/fallofthedynasti012755mbp/fallofthedynasti012755mbp_djvu.txt
	"I have the impression," Sazonov wrote in 1910 to his minister in Belgrade, N. H. de Hartwig, "that Austria-Hungary, despite the German brotherhood in arms, is on her last legs . . . Serbia's promised land lies within the orbit of present-day Austria-Hungary . . . Under these circumstances it is a matter of vital importance for Serbia to put herself by hard and patient work in the position of readiness necessary to face the inevitable outbreak of future war."

	...The gravest repercussions of the Balkan conflicts were indirect. Germany, fearing a new Balkan attack on the Ottoman Empire that might lead to its final dismemberment, drew closer to Austria whose Balkan policy had earlier inspired serious misgivings and with the agreement of the Young Turks, dispatched a German general, Liman von Sanders, to re- organize the Ottoman Army. This move infuriated and frightened the Russians: if German military power with the connivance of a puppet Turkish government established itself astride the Dardanelles, it would be a threat not only to Russia's ambitions but even to her security. An imperial crown council held in St Petersburg on February 21, 1914 came to the gloomy conclusion that only a general European war would enable Russia to realize her "historic aims" i.e. seizure of Constantinople and control of the straits.


https://books.google.com/books?id=H2ELAAAAYAAJ&pg=PA173&lpg=PA173
	The Russian Ambassador at Paris to Sasonoff. Telegram, May 5-18, 1912.

	...Several newspapers, chiefly of an extreme or opposition tendency which have always been hostile to Russia, are repeating their attacks on Russia and on me personally.

	The effort is clearly visible to give the incident a political character and to explain our dissatisfaction with Georges Louis, the French Ambassador in St. Petersburg, by the assumption, that Russia apparently wishes to pursue aggressive policy towards Turkey and that she has in this encountered resistance on the part of the French ambassador. It is known that several papers, which are writing in this vein, receive subsidies from the Turkish Embassy which distributes considerable sums among the local press.


https://www.gwern.net/docs/terrorism/1989-andrew.pdf
    Like much else in the study of contemporary intelligence, KGB and GRU foreign operations are commonly interpreted with almost total disregard for historical perspective. "Active measures" are widely believed to be an invention of Soviet intelligence. In reality, though the KGB has been responsible for an enormous expansion in the use made of them, their effectiveness was at least as great in tsarist times. There is no convincing evidence that any KGB-inspired press campaign in the West as been as effective as the tsarist attempting to persuade Western investors, all of whom later lost their money, to ignore the risks of investing in Russia. Before World War I, every Paris newspaper of note save for the socialist L'Humanite was successfully bribed to support tsarist government loans. By 1914, 25 percent of France's foreign investment was in Russia


https://archive.org/details/fallofthedynasti012755mbp
	...To neutralize the chronic protest of French Socialists and Liberals against its operations on French soil, the Okhrana bribed French newspapers and journalists of the right who were willing to follow a pro-Russian line. According to an expose of the Okhrana written in 1919 by one of its former senior officials, V. K. Agafonov, it financed a journalists' club in Paris and paid regular subsidies to several important French newspapers, including the Echo de Paris, the Gaulois, and the Figaro. The last-named organ, according to Agafonov, for a while received 24,000 rubles-about $10,000 monthly from the Okhrana. 

	..."Do not forget," Izvolsky once wrote his nominal chief in St Petersburg, "that Poincare has to struggle with very influential elements in his own party which are generally hostile to Russia and openly preach that France must not be dragged into any war arising out of Balkan affairs." To the degree that the Russian propaganda-credit was likely to aid Poincare in his "struggles," and thereby to help his political career, it came perilously near to being a personal bribe to him, as well as to the French journalists who were actually to pocket the funds.


https://archive.org/stream/recentrevelation01geor/recentrevelation01geor_djvu.txt
	This grave indictment was pressed home in the volume entitled Georges Louis, by the veteran journalist, Ernest Judet, with the aid of the diplomatist's papers, and an almost hysterical eulogy of 'le plus droit et le plus adroit de nos Ambassadeurs' is combined with passionate denunciations of his enemies at Paris and Petrograd. 'He was sacrificed to a desperado eager to set Europe aflame in consolation for his mistakes, and to a Minister on his knees before the insatiable demands of Panslavism.' The conspiracy to bring about his recall was with difficulty frustrated in 1912 by Ribot, Bourgeois and other friends at home, but was successfully renewed early in 1913, when he was replaced by the fire-eater Delcasse. The prime mover, in the opinion of the Ambassador and his biographer, was Izvolsky, while Sazonoff and Poincare danced to his tune; for Izvolsky thirsted for the Straits, and Poincare encouraged his ally to adventures in the Near East.


https://archive.org/stream/in.ernet.dli.2015.183514/2015.183514.The-Origin-Of-The-War-Of-1914-Vol-11_djvu.txt
	As has been said, [Sazanov] was temperamental and changeable. In the succeeding days he can be seen making a series of suggestions for settling the conflict without sticking to any of them. But at this juncture it would have been difficult for him to show a spirit of accommodation and he was certainly not about to be urged to do so by the eminent personage who was soon to arrive at St. Petersburg, the President of the French Republic. 

	It fell to Viviani, as Foreign Minister, to accompany Poincare to St. Petersburg on the President’s state visit to the Tsar which had been arranged as early as January. On taking office Viviani had at once reaffirmed France’s loyalty to the alliance with Russia and given assurances to Russia that the three year term of military service would be upheld. But he possessed neither the necessary experience nor the authority to direct French foreign policy. This consequently continued to be dominated by Poincare, whom the French pacifists saw with anxiety taking the road to the allied capital for the second time in two years. As early as May Georges Louis asked Caillaux to oppose this journey as likely to have serious consequences. After the Sarajevo tragedy the danger grew, and Jaures vainly urged the Chamber to refuse the grant necessary for the visit. 

	...Following [Sazonov] about in those days was his predecessor and former chief Izvolsky who went around repeating that Russia could not evade the German challenge; that for over a year France had been surprised at the passivity shown by Russia in questions which touched her closely; and that the Dual Alliance would be in mortal danger if the Russian passivity continued. Responding to this impulsion Sazonov in the night of 22-23 July sent Austria a warning for which he had not till now gathered courage. At 4 a.m. on the 23rd he wired the Russian Charge d’ Affaires at Vienna asking him to call Berchtold’s attention ‘cordially but firmly’ to the dangerous consequences to which ‘such a step may lead if it is of a character unacceptable to the dignity of Serbia’. 

	He added that the French and English Ambassadors to Vienna had been instructed to enjoin moderation on the Government there.

	It was, as we shall see, not true that England intended to take such a step. But Poincare agreed to do so, and Viviani, in leaving St. Petersburg, wired instructions to Paris for Dumaine. They went off at 2. a.m. on 24 July.

	Sazonov’s note also arrived too late. The Russian Charge d’Affaires received it at 3 p.m. on the 23rd and went at once to the Ballplatz. But Berchtold sent a message that he was busy and could only see him next morning. At 6 p.m. on the 23td the ultimatum was in the hands of the Serbian Government. Its dispatch, as we know, had been intentionally timed so that it was received just before Poincare left Russian waters. In his farewell toast on board the France, thanking the Tsar for his welcome, Poincare amid the enthusiasm of those present said that their two countries cherished ‘the same ideal of peace in strength, honour and self-respect’. 

	...What exactly was said during the three days that the visit lasted, is something that perhaps will never be known. Georges Louis in his Carnets records Mllerand as having said; ‘I asked Poincare: “But what did you say to the Russians?” I never succeeded in making him tell.’ It should have been the duty of the Prime Minister Viviani to draft minutes of what was said in the talks, as Poincare had done on the occasion of his visit of 1912, If it was not done, there must have been good reasons for this.


https://archive.org/stream/recentrevelation01geor/recentrevelation01geor_djvu.txt
	Georges Louis, on the other hand, believed that the Franco-Russian alliance should be used only for common interests, and that the one partner had no more right to invoke it for Constantinople than the other for Alsace-Lorraine. The neglect of his warnings was speedily followed by the realisation of his fears. Germany, declared Louis, started the war, but Izvolsky supplied the pretext which she sought. The ex-Ambassador, we are told, died a broken-hearted man, while maintaining a patriotic silence to the end. 



------


Holwegg:


https://books.google.com/books?id=nAFfAr3dU_8C&pg=PA79&lpg=PA79
	The press and popular feeling played on the inevitability of a clash between Teuton and Slav. This emotive vocabulary did not seem inappropriate given the reality of the position. THe Russian army's budget--independently of the extraordinary capital grants--had grown from 406 million roubles in 1907/8 to 581 million in 1913/14. Spending on the navy nearly tripled over the same period, and in 1914 exceeded that of Germany. In 1913 the Russians introduced the 'grand programme', enacted in 1914, which aimed to increase the annual contingent of recruits for the army from 455,000 to 585,000, and to expand the total number of divisions from 114.5 to 112.5. The Russian war minister accompanied these enlargements with statements calculated to stoke German anxieties. The German and Austro-Hungarian armies were already inferior to those of France and Russia by over a million men in the sumer of 1914; by 1917 the Russian army alone would be three times the Size of Germany's. The argument that, objectively, there was no chance of a Russian challenge in economic terms did not figure in the calculations on the military balance. By 1914 French loans had enabled the construction of strategic railways so that Russia's mobilization could be accelerated, and the first troops be into battle within fifteen days. German plans drawn up on 1905 rested on the then-valid assumption that Germany would have six weeks in which to deal with France before turning east: the very existence of that planning assumption, which by 1913 was demonstrably wrong, added to Germany's sense of panic. In may 1914, therefore, Moltke's advocacy of a preventative war took on greater urgency, if not more precision: 'we must wage a preventative war', he told Gottlieb von Jagow, the foreign minister, 'to conquer our opponents as long as we still have a reasonable chance in this struggle.'

	Both Jagow and Bethmann Hollweg resisted Moltke's suggestion. But the case for doing so seemed, in the self-absorbed atmosphere of Wilhelmine politics, to be growing weaker. As early as December 1912 Bethmann--who had visited Russia in that year--confessed: 'One must have a good deal of trust in God and count on the Russian revolution as an ally in order to be able to sleep at all.' 


https://archive.org/stream/in.ernet.dli.2015.183514/2015.183514.The-Origin-Of-The-War-Of-1914-Vol-11_djvu.txt
	...on 21 July Pourtalfes wrote to Bethmann Hollweg that 

		since Sazonov's return he has been very anxious about the relations between Austria-Hungary and Serbia. He told me that he had most alarming reports from London, Paris and Rome, where the attitude of Austria-Hungary was everywhere causing growing concern. , . . Sazonov seized the occasion to pour out once more in his usual manner his resentment against Austro-Hungarian policy. . . . There were, he said, powerful and dangerous forces at work ... to plunge Austria into war . , . namely Count Forgach ‘an intriguer of the worst sort’ and Count Tisza, a half madman. . . . Their aim was the annihilation of Serbia (Kaiser’s marginal note: ‘would be the best thing, too!’) ... If Austria-Hungary was determined to break the peace, she would have to reckon with Europe (Kaiser’s marginal note: ‘No! but with Russia, yes!’) . . . Russia would not be able to tolerate Austria-Hungary’s using threatening language to Serbia or taking military measures (Kaiser : ‘qui vivra verra’). ‘Russia’s policy’, said M. Sazonov, ‘is pacific but not passive.’


https://archive.org/details/reflectionsonpt100bethuoft
	Reflections on the world war
	by Bethmann Hollweg, Theobald von

	...I had already made myself acquainted with the gist of the Austrian documents, a copy of which had been communicated to Herr Zimmermann. After I had reviewed their contents the Kaiser declared that he could not let himself be under any illusion as to the gravity of the position into which the Danube Monarchy had been brought by the Greater Serbia propaganda. It was not our business, however, to advise our ally what it must do in respect of the bloody deed at Serajevo. Austria-Hungary must settle that for itself. We must all the more abstain from any direct action or advice, as we must labour with every means to prevent the Austro-Serbian dispute developing into an international conflict.


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Theobald_von_Bethmann-Hollweg
	Following the assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand in Sarajevo on 28 June 1914, Bethmann-Hollweg and his foreign minister, Gottlieb von Jagow, were instrumental in assuring Austria-Hungary of Germany's unconditional support, regardless of Austria's actions against Serbia. 


https://archive.org/details/fallofthedynasti012755mbp
	In the circumstances Grey took what he felt was the most vigorous possible action. He called in the German Ambassador, Prince Karl Lichnowsky, spoke to him frankly about his worries, and made a formal plea that Germany use its good offices in Vienna to facilitate acceptance of the Serbian reply at least as a basis for further negotiation. The whole conversation, backed by the announcement in the British press the same day that leave had been canceled in the British Navy—the personal initiative of the First Sea Lord, Winston Churchill—constituted the most explicit warning yet given not to count on British neutrality. Prince Lichnowsky, like the alert and conscientious diplomat that he was, immediately grasped its import and relayed it to Berlin with the sense of urgency that the situation called for. 

	Lichnowsky’s dispatch reached the Wilhelmstrasse at about the same moment as a message from Vienna informing the German government that Austria would declare war on Serbia the next day, or at the latest on July 29. Thereupon Bethmann-Hollweg committed either an incredible blunder, or—as Albertini and some other historians believe—an act of almost equally incredible duplicity. Acting upon instructions from the Kaiser, he forwarded to Vienna Sir Edward Grey’s suggestion about German good offices, but on his own initiative he omitted a key passage in the message he had received from the German Embassy in London which stressed the seriousness of the British warning, and he failed to indicate any official German endorsement of the suggestion; he merely asked for the Austrian views about it. He even allowed his colleague, Jagow, to call in the Austrian Ambassador, and in effect to advise him that the Austrians should pay no attention to any British suggestions that Berlin might feel obliged, for the sake of the record, to forward.


https://books.google.com/books?id=nAFfAr3dU_8C&pg=PA91
	What is striking about the 'blank cheque' is not that it was issued but that it was indeed blank. The council had made little effort to discuss the implications of what it was doing. Its decisions followed from previous events rather than from a projection as to the future. Falkenhayn wrote to Moltke expressing the view that neither he nor Bethmann Hollweg believed that Austria-Hungary would follow through the forceful language which it had so far employed. But Bethmann Holweg had done little to inform himself on precisely this point. When on 9 July he told the minister of the interior, Clemens von Delbruck, of the impending Austrian ultimatum he confessed that he had no idea of its contents; furthermore, so little was he disturbed by his own ignorance that he used it as a device to still Delbruck's alarm.


https://archive.org/details/fallofthedynasti012755mbp
	The Austrian ultimatum to Serbia, which the British Foreign Minister, Lord Grey, called the most formidable document ever addressed by one state to another, had been minutely and interminably hatched in the Vienna Foreign Office. It was finally adopted in a Joint Council of Ministers on July 19. Count Berchtold's main concern had been candidly described by the German Ambassador in a dispatch to Berlin: 

		"Were the Serbs to accept all the demands, this will be a solution not at all to his [Count Berchtold's] liking and he is turning over in his mind what demands could be made that would render acceptance by Serbia absolutely impossible." 

	Berchtold's soul-searching had already resulted in a list of conditions, the acceptance of which would have implied a revision of the Serbian constitution.


https://archive.org/details/fallofthedynasti012755mbp
	The fatalism which had increasingly gripped the chancellor had become a device to ease him of responsibility for his actions. Later in the same month he was to express the view that 'a fate greater than human power hangs over the situation in Europe and over the German people'.

	...Such an extraordinary abdication of responsibility is all the more remarkable in view of the fact that Bethmann Hollweg's calculations did not exclude the possibility of a major European war.





https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/July_Crisis#The_events_leading_to_the_Austro-Hungarian_ultimatum
	Riezler went to write in his diary that Bethmann Hollweg painted a "devastating picture" with Russia building rail-roads in Congress Poland that allow Russia to mobilize faster once the Great Military Programme was finished in 1917,[61] and that an Austro-Serbian war would probably cause a world war, "which would lead to an overthrow of the existing order", but since the "existing order was lifeless and void of ideas", such a war could only be welcomed as a blessing to Germany.


wtf


------


doing things behind Kaiser's back:


https://archive.org/stream/fallofthedynasti012755mbp/fallofthedynasti012755mbp_djvu.txt
	The Kaiser, himself, began to show agitation. Sudden and fully justified suspicion of the Wilhelmstrasse caused him to cut short his cruise. A meandering report from the Chancellor full of understatements and omissions and concluding with the news that "the diplomatic situation is not quite clear" put him in a thundering bad temper on his return to the capital, July 27.


	This was probably the decisive day of the crisis. The text of the Serbian reply to Austria's ultimatum reached the Wilhelmstrasse which had not bothered to ask for it sooner about midafternoon, along with the first foreign reactions to it. Tie document caused dismay, as it had done in Vienna, where the Ballplatz official who had himself drafted the Austrian note termed it "the most brilliant example of diplomatic astuteness" in his experience. In reasonable and moderate terms the Serbians had accepted most of the Austrian demands, formulated some reservations on others and rejected only point six, which called for the participation of Austrian police in the investigations on Serbian territory. So much reasonableness might make too great an impression on the Kaiser; he must not see the Serbian note any sooner than could be helped. The Wilhelmstrasse accordingly dawdled so long about getting the document already two days old to Potsdam that Wilhelm did not read it until the next morning--a fateful delay. 



-----


Russia mobilization:

https://books.google.com/books?id=xFgTDAAAQBAJ&pg=PA86&lpg=PA86&dq=St.+Petersburg+had+reported+that+Russia+was+not+likely+to+be+held+back&source=bl&ots=nEfA55w05z&sig=ro4mWNteQRZqavT6wgeYrFQGqAE&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwif_ozakdbWAhXDOiYKHexwCogQ6AEIKDAA#v=onepage&q=St.%20Petersburg%20had%20reported%20that%20Russia%20was%20not%20likely%20to%20be%20held%20back&f=false
	Any military preparations by Russia, even if designed to counter Austria-Hungary alone, would have been sufficient to prompt German mobilization. This is obviously true if Germany is seen as an aggressive power, already committed to European war, and certainly not disposed to pass up the opportunity of having its eastern frontier protected by Austrian operations against the Russians and so being freed to concentrate in the weest. But it is also applicable in the context of a more reactive interpretation, of Germany's self-imposed image as the tragic victim: the sense of being in a corner, the preoccupation with time which not only the mobilization timetable but also the political management of the crisis generated, combined with fear of Russia and the obligation to Austria-Hungary to make Russia's partial mobilization as intolerable to Germany as general mobilization.

	Bethmann Hollweg was nonetheless slow to realize the gravity of the criss which confronted him. On 25 July Germany's ambassador in St. Petersburg had reported that Russia was not likely to be held back by fear of domestic disorder. Despite this clear indication that the strategy of a short, sharp Austro-Serbian war would misfire, the German chancellor continued to pursue that objective.

	...And by the time that Bethmann HOlweg had apprised Austria-Hungary of Britain's view (which he took pains to point out that he did not share)--that the Serb reply was acceptable--Vienna had already rebuffed the Serbs and was preparing for war.

	...Before 28 July the message from Britain above all, but also from France and Russia, was clear: the local war must be avoided in order to prevent a major war. Bethmann Holwegg did not attempt to avoid a major war until after the local war had been initiated.



-----


another one: Lenin apparently doing the German foreign Ministry's wishes:

https://www.marxists.org/archive/lenin/works/1917/may/14.htm
