https://archive.org/stream/genesisofworldwa00harr/genesisofworldwa00harr_djvu.txt
	It has been charged that in placing the guilt 
for the World War upon a few individuals such 
as Poincare, Delcasse, Cambon, Izvolski, Sazo- 
nov and Grand Duke Nicholas, the writer has 
departed from his fundamental historical phi- 
losophy which stresses the primary significance 
of great intellectual currents, economic influences 
and social forces in determining the course of his- 
torical events. The writer has never pretended 
to believe that general historical forces operate 
independent of the individual actors in the his- 
toric drama. The individuals above mentioned would never have been able to bring about a 
European war in 1914 if the general situation in 
I Europe had not been shaping up for such an 
event for some years before 1914. Poincare 
; and Izvolski were successful because the general 
( orientation of European society and politics was 
I favorable to the realization of their program 
I through an appeal to economic envy, national- 
I ism, secret diplomacy and military force. 



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Harry_Elmer_Barnes
	Harry Elmer Barnes (June 15, 1889 – August 25, 1968) was an American historian who, in his later years, was known for his historical revisionism and Holocaust denial. Barnes taught history at Columbia University from 1918 to 1929. Afterwards, he worked as a freelance writer and occasional adjunct professor at smaller schools. Through his position at Columbia and his prodigious scholarly output, Barnes was once highly regarded as a historian. However, by the end of the 1950s, he had lost credibility because of the major role he played in the inception of the Holocaust denial movement.


what's up with that?




https://archive.org/stream/recentrevelation01geor/recentrevelation01geor_djvu.txt
	The name of Georges Louis, Political Director of 
the Quai d'Orsay and later the successor of Bompard 
as Ambassador to Russia, is far better known after his 
death than during his life, for the closing scenes of his 
long career have become the theme of embittered con- 
troversy. His champions opened the attack with a 
little volume entitled Poincare a-t-il voulu la guerre ? 
in which Gouttenoire de Toury argued that the Ambassa- 
dor had been recalled because he attempted to counter- 
work the bellicose policy of Russian and French 
Imperialists. This grave indictment was pressed home 
in the volume entitled Georges Louis, by the veteran 
journalist, Ernest Judet, with the aid of the diplomatist's 
papers, and an almost hysterical eulogy of ' le plus droit 
et le plus adroit de nos Ambassadeurs ' is combined with 
passionate denunciations of his enemies at Paris and 
Petrograd. '


so Ernest Judet says (I think) France's ambassador to Russia was trying to stop the war but was recalled.


	He was sacrificed to a desperado eager to set 
Europe aflame in consolation for his mistakes, and to a 
Minister on his knees before the insatiable demands of 
Panslavism.' The conspiracy to bring about his recall was 
with difficulty frustrated in 1 9 1 2 by Ribot, Bourgeois and 
other friends at home, but was successfully renewed early 
in 19 1 3, when he was replaced by the fire-eater Delcasse\ 
The prime mover, in the opinion of the Ambassador and 
his biographer, was Izvolsky, while SazonofF and Poincare 
danced to his tune ; for Izvolsky thirsted for the Straits, 
and Poincare encouraged his ally to adventures in the 
Near East. Georges Louis, on the other hand, believed 
that the Franco-Russian alliance should be used only for 
common interests, and that the one partner had no more 
right to invoke it for Constantinople than the other for 
Alsace-Lorraine. The neglect of his warnings was 
speedily followed by the realisation of his fears. Germany, 
declared Louis, started the war, but Izvolsky supplied 
the pretext which she sought. The ex-Ambassador, we 
are told, died a broken-hearted man, while maintaining 
a patriotic silence to the end. 


Ribot and Bourgeois said to try to frustrate conspiracy to recall him

Izovlsky said to be "prime mover," with Sazonov and Poincare "dancing to his tune"



https://translate.google.com/translate?hl=en&sl=fr&u=https://archive.org/stream/LesCausesLointainesDeLaGuerre_399/AndrChradameLesCausesLointainesDeLaGuerre-clan9DocumentFrenchEbookFranais_djvu.txt&prev=search
	In November 1924, Revue Europe continued the campaign to establish France's responsibility by publishing excerpts from the notebook of Mr. Georges Louis who was an ambassador from France to St Petersburg until 1912 - The latter, in particular, assured that Mr. Stephen Pichon would have said to him: "Ah!  if you had been left there;  if you had remained an ambassador at St. Petersburg, and if I had been at the Foreign Affairs, we would not have had war, "and Mr. Louis would have replied:" Certainly you at the Quai d'Orsay and M. Fallieres at the Elysee, war did not break out.  I said that a lot of times.  M. Georges Louis attributed to M. Cambon and M. Paléologue remarks similar to those of M. Pichon, all of which tend to make Raymond Poincaré the principal responsible for war.  Messrs.  Pichon, Cambon, Paleologue have formally denied the words attributed to them;  but, as can easily be imagined, the publication of Mr. Louis's affirmations was received with enthusiasm at Berlin.  The German press declared that Mr. Poincaré's responsibility for the war was now established.  III. Then the campaign resumed with more splendor at the beginning of 1925, when M. Ernest Judet's book, Georges Louis, appeared.  For a long time, the director of the Petit Journal, and then of L'Éclair, in the years preceding the war, M. Judet, had long been in conflict with M. Clemenceau.  The latter, in power during the war, accused Judet of being pro-German.  Condemned in absentia, Judet asked for a review of his trial in 1923. He obtained an acquittal from the jury.  Let us first consider Mr. Judet's assertions, as he produced them in his book. 


there was some kind of media campaign in Germany to blame France for the war


	We will then confront them with the facts, in order to appreciate them as accurately as possible.  For M. Judet, from 1912 to 1913, "three prominent actors coalesced against a single opponent, in order to bring dangerously to European politics: then conspired together Isvolsky, Sazonoff, and behind the curtain in the dim light, Mr. Poincaré ".  (Judgment, p. 15.) Mr. Judet adopted with a clear satisfaction the following point of view of Mr. Louis.  "Poincar6 has become Isvolsky's instrument, and it is the latter who, by linking with Tittoni, declared the Tripolitan war.  From the Balkan war came the current war ".  For Judet, it was Mr. Isvolsky, in particular, who unleashed the war: "Whenever Isvolsky felt the urgent need to stimulate zeal of our government, he resorted to great means with aplomb equal to charlatanism.  He had his war; he died buried beneath the remains of his country.  "If he has left St. Petersburg, if he is ambassador, it is to act faster and to radiate farther, to govern more surely And, even at the price of a general war, to carry Russia to its ends, to the Straits, and to Constantinople.  It is the dream of his nights, the work of his days.  ".


Judet says Isvolsky wanted the war for Constantinople, Poincare conspiring for the "Tripolitan war"


	...M. Judet accuses M. Isvolsky, quite rightly, of having created a good press in France for money;  but we shall see later that this accusation must be extended to other foreign diplomats in France.  "If we decide to raise the question of the Straits now," said Mr. Isvolsky in a dispatch to his government, "it is very important to be concerned here with" a good press. "  Now, in this respect, I am deprived of the principal weapon. "An example of the advantage of spending money here for the press is provided by the affair of Tripolitania.


also accuses of paying off press


	So to M. Judet, M. Isvolsky unleashed the war; but Mr. Georges Louis had prevented if M. Poincaré had let him. M. Judet reproduced, as the expression of some truth, this statement of Mr. Georges Louis: "It's Germany that declared war, but it is the fault of our Govern- ment it could make it burst. "She was waiting for an opportunity, because she was ready and she knew that his adversary sary were not. We should do everything to divert or delay the blow she wanted to hit. Instead, we let the fau- tors of war prepare long-hand - 24 - they wanted the opportunity to be born. "(V. Op. Cit. P. 298.)


Louis thought that French foreign policy-makers were pushing towards war when they should have been trying to prevent it (sounds similar to what was going on in Germany)


	Mr.Judet believes that Nicolas II made the mistake of not listening to Georges Louis who alone could save Russia. Nicolas II "certainly does not doubt that the Ambassador invited to his table would take with him the peace of the world and the salvation of the Empire of Romanoff f. "(.... V supra p 229.) As to the trends of Georges Louis M. Judet defines in these lines between which it is necessary to read" Concerned technical interests of our armies of land and sea in conjunction with the Russian armies, he repudiated the above-pectes intentions that led eventually to the general confla- gration. Is it not the first duty of a government that respects itself to make the difficult conflicts and ruptures impos- sible? "Let troops supervised and educated Boatswain generals,new equipment and best weapons in perfect condition! But the economy of a war is better than its hazards as dignity is safe and that the use of cannon is not necessary. If diplomacy is only a branch accessory of the Ministry of war, if it does not interpose before the mobilization posters are on the walls before the powder spoke, she abdicates, it ceases to exis - - 25 - b. When she gives too early to speak bayonets, it neglects to exhaust re- sources, forces that prevail until the last minute. Georges Louis never consented to desert his perfect diplomat. He worked for peace and not for war. "(V. Op. Cit., Page 134.) 


Louis said to have worked toward peace


	Mr. Georges Louis feared that Russia no man might provocative policy in the Balkans,but he found himself how Nicolas II was careful and measured in this regard. "My meeting with the Emperor focused principally on the Italo-Turkish conflict and the Balkan tion situations. First I'd referred to the audience that His Majesty granted me last September. It was an opportunity to indirectly remind the memory of the Emperor all the reasons that Russia has then argued for a cautious policy in the RET integrated the two allies. "His Majesty has shown convinced of the ne- cessity to both governments to refrain from any separate action, and unite their efforts to remove all questions that might com- pliquer the current conflict. "(V. Op. Cit. P. 104).


Louis thought the Tsar was receptive to arguments for peace?


	But this observation of his friend, Louis,is not enough for M. Judet. He continues to consider any Russian action in the Balkans as being inadmissible. In a toast to the king of Montenegro, Nicolas II said - 26 - "The long peaceful development and prosper- ity of the young kingdom, under the leadership of Your Majesty, to never find a lively response, fraternal sympathy and where it takes, support from me and from that of Russia. " (V. Op. Cit. P. 176.) M. Judet italic print this "where he will" as the equivalent of a provocation to Germany. M. Judet is clearly ima- gine that nothing was done in the Balkans that the instigation of Russia. "It is, and suddenly broke the announcement of Serbo-Bulgarian treaty. It was the first link in the chain that will form the Alliance balka- lunch. "(V.op. cit. p. 178.) M. Judet, like Louis, France would have had to divert Russia from the Balkans and especially refrain of finding herself the slightest interest. He criticizes M. Poincaré to have admitted in 1912, even in principle, that the war could be a consequence of the policy of the Au- cheating in the Balkans where manifes- ment however she tried to pave the way Germanism. "The 4-17 November 1912 Isvolsky continues M. Judet, returned to the charge, of in- redoubled resistance and removed the membership that it was so expensive: M. Poincaré replied that it was impossible formulate, even privately, the line of conduct in France - 27 - the possibility of an active intervention of Austria,before the Imperial Government told him of his own intentions. "It's to Russia, he said, that it is to take the initiative in a matter in which it is the main interest: the role of France is to lend him his most effective competition" In short adds Poincaré, all this means that if Russia makes war, the France will also since we know that in this issue, behind Austria, there will be Germany "(v. op. . cit. p 60.) the language of M. Poincaré was the same sense; M. Judet but does not admit it, because it continues to believe that the Balkan Wars of 1912-1913 were the work of Russia. "If the government of M. Poincaré - con- tinues M. Judet - did not know before the month ofAugust that the war was at the bottom of contracts signed outside of us by Italy with Russia and by Russian officers with the Balkan states is that he did not listen to his ambassador (Louis) and , trying to break it, reducing it, forcing him to defend himself instead of continuing his work of information and monitoring, it is deprived of the sand indispen- agent to prevent war Balkan block his path and prevent World war. Since January, George Louis called - 28 - attention to the Austro-Russian-Italian political Isvolsky which was the inventor and director. "(V. Op. Cit. P. 169) In presenting this opinion, M. Judet only reproduces that of Mr. Louis who claimed" to M. Sazonoff as to Mr. Isvolsky this n 'is neither in China nor in Persia, but in the Balkans that Russia must now bear the main thrust of its policy. " (V. Op. Cit. P.175.) Mr. Louis M. Judet and believed that it was enough to get to demand in the Balkans maintain the status quo. "What's more rational, wiser, more urgent for France, not least for Russia, which we could not separate us without madness and he should not marry dementia? It was talking about gold: but in Paris the zigzag policy lacks every opportunity to lead the European boat

-------


Geoerge Louis was ambassador 1908-1913

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_Ambassadors_of_France_to_Russia


https://books.google.com/books?id=H2ELAAAAYAAJ&pg=PA173&lpg=PA173&dq=%22Georges+Louis%22+French+ambassador+to+Russia&source=bl&ots=lYizkBnSD_&sig=3yjTDYz_JNNhoO49EIhg0MB1m10&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwjJ2LT0zuLWAhWD7iYKHfBcAr4Q6AEIRzAK#v=onepage&q=%22Georges%20Louis%22%20French%20ambassador%20to%20Russia&f=false


Russian ambassador in France says Russia dissatified with Louis, in part because he doesn't want to have an aggressive stance against Turkey. Russian ambassador in France posits that the French media have been bought-off by Turkey.



------


https://archive.org/stream/in.ernet.dli.2015.183514/2015.183514.The-Origin-Of-The-War-Of-1914-Vol-11_djvu.txt
	It fell to Viviani, as Foreign Minister, to accompany Poincard to St. 
Petersburg on the President’s state visit to the Tsar which had been 
arranged as early as January. On taking office Viviani had at once 
reaffirmed France’s loyalty to the alliance with Russia and given assur- 
ances to Russia that the three year term of military service would be 
upheld. But he possessed neither the necessary experience nor the 
authority to direct French foreign policy. This consequently continued 
to be dominated by Poincard whom the French pacifists saw with 
anxiety taking the road to the allied capital for the second time in two 
years. As early as May Georges Louis asked CaiUaux to oppose this 
journey as likely to have serious consequences. After the Sarajevo 
tragedy the danger grew, and Jaures vainly urged the Chamber to 
refuse the grant necessary for the visit. 


Louis tried to stop Poincare's visit to Russia


------


https://archive.org/stream/in.ernet.dli.2015.183514/2015.183514.The-Origin-Of-The-War-Of-1914-Vol-11_djvu.txt
	This was enough to alarm Sazonov, and on 21 July Pourtalfes wrote 
to Bethmann HoUweg that 

		since Sazonov's return he has been very anxious about the relations between 
Austria-Hungary and Serbia. He told me that he had most alarming reports 
from London, Paris and Rome, where the attitude of Austria-Hungary was 
everywhere causing growing concern. , . . Sazonov seized the occasion to 
pour out once more in his usual manner his resentment against Austro- 
Hungarian policy. . . . There were, he said, powerful and dangerous forces 
at work ... to plunge Austria into war . , . namely Count Forgach ‘an 
intriguer ofthe worst sort’ and Count Tisza, a half madman. . . . Their aim 
was the annihilation of Serbia (Kaiser’s marginal note: ‘would be the best 
thing, tool’) ... If Austria-Hungary was determined to break the peace, 
she would have to reckon with Europe (Kaiser’s marginal note: ‘Nol but 
with Russia, yes!’) . . . Russia would not be able to tolerate Austria- 
Hungary’s using threatening language to Serbia or taking military measures 
(Kaiser : ‘qui vivra verra’). ‘Russia’s policy’, said M. Sazonov, ‘is pacific but not 
passive.’® 

	Sazonov’s words caimot always be taken at their full value.


Sazanov blames war on "powerful and dangerous forces" and "madmen" in Austria

	As has 
been said, he was temperamental and changeable. In the succeeding 
days he can be seen making a series of suggestions for settling the 
conflict without stiddng to any of them. But at this juncture it would 
have been difficult for him to show a spirit of accommodation and he 
was certainly not about to be urged to do so by the eminent personage 
who was soon to arrive at St. Petersburg, the President of the French 
Republic. 


Poincare made Sazanov more sure of aggression?


	It fell to Viviani, as Foreign Minister, to accompany Poincard to St. 
Petersburg on the President’s state visit to the Tsar which had been 
arranged as early as January. On taking office Viviani had at once 
reaffirmed France’s loyalty to the alliance with Russia and given assur- 
ances to Russia that the three year term of military service would be 
upheld. But he possessed neither the necessary experience nor the 
authority to direct French foreign policy. This consequently continued 
to be dominated by Poincard whom the French pacifists saw with 
anxiety taking the road to the allied capital for the second time in two 
years. As early as May Georges Louis asked CaiUaux to oppose this 
journey as likely to have serious consequences. After the Sarajevo 
tragedy the danger grew, and Jaures vainly urged the Chamber to 
refuse the grant necessary for the visit. 


I guess it would raise tensions to have a meeting like that after they reaffirm alliance


Albertini points to an unusual lack of records for the meeting



	...Following 
him about in those days was his predecessor and former chief Izvolsky 
who went around repeating that Russia could not evade the German 
challenge; that for over a year France had been surprised at the passivity 
shown by Russia in questions which touched her closely; and that 
the Dual Alliance would be in mortal danger if the Russian passivity 
continued. Responding to this impulsion Sazonov in the night of 
22-23 July sent Austria a warning for which he had not till now 
gathered courage. At 4 a.m. on the 23 rd he wired the Russian Charge 
d’ Affaires at Vienna asking him to call Berchtold’s attention ‘cordially 
but firmly’ to the dangerous consequences to which ‘such a step may 
lead if it is of a character unacceptable to the dignity of Serbia’. 

	He added that the French and English Ambassadors to Vienna had 
been instructed to enjoin moderation on the Government there.^ 

	It was, as we shall see, not true that England intended to take such 
a step. But Poincare agreed to do so, and Viviani, in leaving St. Peters- 
burg, wired instructions to Paris for Dumaine. They went off at 2. j a.m. 
on 24 July.® 

	Sazonov’s note also arrived too late. The Russian Charge d’Af&ires 
received it at 3 p.m. on the 23rd and went at once to the Ballplatz. But 
Berchtold sent a message that he was busy and could only see him next 
morning. At 6 p.m. on the 23td the ultimatum was in the hands of the 
Serbian Government. Its dispatch, as we know, had been intentionally 
timed so that it was received just before Poincar6 left Russian waters. 
In his farewell toast on board the France, thanldng the Tsar for his 
welcome, Poincar^ amid the enthusiasm of those present said that their 
two countries cherished ‘the same ideal of peace in strength, honour and 
self-respect’. 

		That is just what wanted saying — commented the Montenegrin princesses 
— just what we have been waiting for so long. Peace in strength, honour and 
self respect. Remember those words. Monsieur TAmbassadeur, they will 
mark a date in the history of the world.^ 

	Indeed they were spoken only a few moments before the curtain rose 
on the Ikst act of the tragedy. A year later, in recalling this farewell, 
Nicholas II was to say to a former French Cabinet Minister, Cruppi; 

		1 have always present in my memory the firm words spoken to me by 
the President of the Republic on 23 July 1914 when he was oh the point of 
leaving Russia.® 

	What exacdy was said during the three days that the visit lasted, is 
something that perhaps will never be known. Georges Louis in his 
Carnets records Mllerand as having said; ‘I asked Poincard: “But what 
did you say to the Russians?” I never succeeded in making him tell.’® 
It should have been the duty of the Prime Minister Viviani to draft 
minutes of what was said in the talks, as Poincard had done on the 
occasion of his visit of 1912, If it was not done, there must have been 
good reasons for this.


Poincare tight-lipped on what was said, Albertini suggests a deal was made, all of which happens immediately before Austria's demands

Presumably, Sazanov would want Poincare's assurances before acting to start a war.