With the help of the imperial police, whose persecution of the milder type of revolutionary agitators had alienated liberal opinion, the influence of the “Nihilists” grew in one wing of the Narodnik movement. The extremists, supported by émigré groups, formed a conspiratorial society, the Will of the People, dedicated to the cult of the bomb. It became the nucleus from which the Socialist-Revolutionary Party, one of the two great revolutionary groups in twentieth-century Russia, eventually sprang up. In the reign of Alexander II, the Will of the People had only a few hundred members, but they were armed, and trained in conspiracy and organized in cells, and that was enough to kill hope. Two attempts to assassinate the Czar failed. The third one, on March 13, 1881, succeeded just after Alexander had signed a decree proclaiming an embryonic Constitution, aimed at reassuring the liberals. A terrorist threw a bomb at the Czar’s carriage as he was driving through the streets of St. Petersburg following a military review. He got out to look after some Cossacks of his suite who had been wounded. A second assassin, a young Pole, shouting “It’s too early to thank God,” threw another bomb. Alexander’s legs were shattered, his face mutilated and his belly torn open. “Home to the Palace, to die there,” he mumbled. His family, including his grandson Nicholas, the future Nicholas II, then twelve years old and dressed in a sailor suit, assembled in time to see his last moments. The Czar’s murder plunged Russia back into the dark night of reaction. It grew steadily darker under the reign of his son Alexander III whose censor forbade the newspapers even to print the word “Constitution.”

Taylor, Edmond. The Fall Of The Dynasties: The Collapse Of The Old Order, 1905-1922 [Illustrated Edition] (Kindle Locations 1100-1111). Verdun Press. Kindle Edition. 


another way how Okhrana helped People's Will


------


In Czarist Russia conspiracy was the precondition for effective revolutionary action—or so the Bolsheviks believed—and being a professional revolutionary therefore implied being a technician of conspiracy. Lenin deliberately, almost ecstatically, steeped himself in the professionalism of his calling. His letters and many of his newspaper articles are peppered with technical, do-it-yourself advice on the preparation and use of invisible inks, bomb-making in the home, how to be a success in street fighting, and related subjects. During the 1905 revolution Lenin came close to bridging the psychological gap that had hitherto separated the Marxist revolutionaries in Russia from the cultists of terror like the Social Revolutionaries and the Anarchists. In fact he even shocked some of the more high-minded terrorists by organizing bank holdups and other systematic acts of brigandage—termed expropriations or “exes”—to raise funds for the party.

Taylor, Edmond. The Fall Of The Dynasties: The Collapse Of The Old Order, 1905-1922 [Illustrated Edition] (Kindle Locations 3672-3679). Verdun Press. Kindle Edition. 


Lenin into espionage


------


There is a strong suspicion, however, that in the service of his dream he deliberately allowed himself to be exploited for a while as a weapon in the Austrian secret-service duel with Russia. To that degree he bears some modest share of responsibility—along with the autocrats and the gun merchants—for World War I.

Taylor, Edmond. The Fall Of The Dynasties: The Collapse Of The Old Order, 1905-1922 [Illustrated Edition] (Kindle Locations 3773-3776). Verdun Press. Kindle Edition. 


what


There was one daily newspaper in Russia that had a single subscriber: the Czar. It was published by the Ministry of the Interior, and it consisted exclusively of information about the activities of the secret police and of the penal administration for political prisoners. The sheet probably contained everything of importance known to the Minister of the Interior himself, but like every other newspaper in Czarist Russia it was heavily censored; some of the police news was not considered fit to print, even in a classified publication for the Emperor’s eyes alone.

The censoring was done, of course, by the policemen themselves, that is by the officials—not necessarily at the top level—of the Okhrana, the political secret police. Nominally reporting to the Ministry of the Interior, but actually a law unto itself, the Okhrana was only one of several Russian secret services; leaving aside the unofficial and the purely military ones for the time being, the general police, which was also under the Minister of the Interior, had some specialized undercover departments, and the Police of the Imperial Court, responsible for the protection of the Czar and his family, had an important secret branch which employed numerous spies and stool pigeons. To further complicate things, the Okhrana itself was highly decentralized; it had branches in several of the larger Russian cities and in foreign capitals, each with its own network of secret informants.

In one form or another the Okhrana had existed since the days of Peter the Great, but its most spectacular proliferation took place after the assassination of Alexander II in 1881. From 1905 on its growth was quite monstrous, by 1914 it was believed to employ regularly some 20,000 officers and agents. Its regular budget was around $2,000,000 a year, some of it earmarked for press and propaganda use, but it could also draw when necessary on a $5,000,000 secret state fund under the Czar’s personal control. These sums look modest by present-day standards, but they were enormous in the society where the salary of a secret agent was often as low as $15 a month.

Like other political police services in Europe at the time—for example the French Sureté Générale—the Okhrana tried to plant or recruit undercover informants in the various revolutionary organizations. Its uniqueness lay in the scale of its operations, and in its encouragement to these informants to play an active role within the groups they had penetrated, even when it meant breaking the law. After the revolution a former chief of the Okhrana, General Guerassimov, who headed the organization from 1906 to 1909, revealed that he never had fewer than 120 secret agents in the left-wing revolutionary organizations. Most of these agents, he added maliciously, were still active in the Soviet state. One of the Okhrana’s most remarkable undercover men was a florid, flashily dressed one-time St. Petersburg metalworker and labor organizer named Roman Malinovsky, who first spied upon the Mensheviks, and then with police approval joined the Bolsheviks, where he soon became a special protégé of Lenin’s. His career in the party was spectacular; he was one of the “intelligent scoundrels” on the Bolshevik central committee, and he rose to be the chief Bolshevik spokesman in the Imperial Duma—the Okhrana is said to have facilitated his election as a deputy by arresting his leading rivals. Lenin named him as the St. Petersburg manager and nominal publisher of the Bolshevik organ Pravda, and Malinovsky faithfully submitted copy for it both to Lenin and to his chiefs in the Okhrana.

Thanks to Malinovsky, the Okhrana obtained invaluable information about the revolutionary plans and activities of the Bolsheviks, but though it occasionally arrested undercover Bolshevik organizers, it made no use of its inside knowledge to cripple the party. On the contrary, it encouraged its growth, not only to build up its own agent, Malinovsky, but apparently because it considered the Bolsheviks, with some justification, as a disruptive element in the ranks of the Russian Marxists. According to some sources, the Okhrana at Malinovsky’s suggestion enabled Lenin to win a majority at a special party congress in Prague in 1912 by arresting three of his leading opponents. The symbiosis symbiosis between the Okhrana and its Bolshevik enemies, not only through Malinovsky, but through a host of lesser though no less active double agents, was close enough to leave a lasting mark on the operational attitudes of both organizations: the Bolshevik spy-phobia which later attained such monstrous proportions in the Stalin era was certainly in part the heritage of the Okhrana.

The Okhrana’s relations with the out-and-out terrorist groups were no less equivocal than its relations with the Social Democrats. For many years the head of the Social Revolutionary assassination squads, a bearded, appropriately villainous-looking individual named Evno Azew, was the Okhrana’s star undercover agent Unquestionably he was strategically placed: the most formidable terrorist organization in Russia could not plan a murder without the Okhrana receiving warning in advance. There was, of course, one slight drawback to the arrangement: if Azew were not allowed a reasonable quota of assassinations his professional reputation might suffer, and eventually the terrorists would replace him with a more efficient and reliable killer. On the other hand there was a feeling in some police circles that Azew had been allowed perhaps a little too much scope when in 1904 he helped plan the murder of his own employer, Minister of the Interior V. K. Plehve; the feeling grew sharper the following year when Azew’s associates blew up the Czar’s uncle, Grand Duke Serge in Moscow. Strictly speaking, Azew was not to blame for this outrage; he had reported it in good time for preventing it, but the Okhrana, apparently fearing to expose a useful agent by being too explicit, had passed on to the local authorities a warning, so vague as to be worthless.

When Azew later reported a plot to assassinate the Czar himself, General Guerassimov decided that to avoid any further slips he would personally take over the management of his talented but redoubtable agent Thanks to this high-level supervision the plot was eventually foiled without damage either to the Czar or to Azew. Eventually Azew was exposed, but he was never brought to justice. When the scandal became serious the Okhrana helped him to escape abroad, where he remained in genteel retirement until his death in 1918.


Okhrana aid Bolsheviks, assassinations


Employing terrorists as double agents is inescapably a tricky business; this was particularly true in Russia where the national temperament lends itself to complex and subtly shaded relationships intermediate between absolute loyalty and total treason. There were probably Okhrana agents in the revolutionary organizations—Azew may actually have been such a case—who did not know themselves which side they were ultimately betraying, or betraying the most Uncertainties on this score were compounded by divergencies among different factions in the Okhrana—never exactly a band of brothers—over whom the empire could best spare if someone had to be sacrificed to preserve an agent-terrorist’s “cover.” Regulations promulgated in 1907 instructed agents provocateurs to refrain from participating in terrorist activities whenever possible; in no case were they to participate without first obtaining authorization from their immediate supervisors. These rules tended to eliminate some of the incidental abuses that had developed, but did not solve the basic moral and practical problems of a police force trying to protect the state by conspiring with its enemies.

The evils of the system were dramatically underscored by the assassination of Prime Minister Peter Stolypin in 1911, who was shot down under the eyes of the Czar during a gala performance in the opera house of Kiev. The Kiev branch office of the Okhrana had received warning of a plot to assassinate Stolypin from one of its former agents, a man named Dimitri Bogrov, who had remained in touch with revolutionary circles. The Okhrana held off arresting the terrorists identified by Bogrov in the hopes of learning through him the complete details of their plan, but it passed on the warning to the Ministry of the Interior, which ordered drastic re-enforcement of the security arrangements for the protection of the Czar and of the high government officials scheduled to arrive in Kiev. Police threw an impenetrable cordon around the opera house and packed it with detectives, while passes and invitation cards were subjected to expert scrutiny. It seemed inconceivable that a terrorist could slip into the building—until Bogrov, who had been admitted in order to brief the chief of the local Okhrana on the last-minute arrangements of his confederates, pulled out a pistol as soon as he caught sight of the Prime Minister, and shot him dead.


haha what


On occasion the Okhrana organized escapes and prison breaks to build the “cover” of its agents, and though it clung to the fiction that these were merely passive informants, many of them were agents provocateurs in the most literal sense. Though the investigating committee set up under the Kerensky regime could not find documentary proof that the Okhrana had deliberately instigated street demonstrations and rebellions, there is a wealth of informed testimony that it did so, notably in the great Moscow uprising of 1905 and in similar bloody disorders in Kronstadt and Viborg.


Okhrana making up excuses to assassinate people, jailbreak agents


During the 1905 revolution the Okhrana got into the habit of working closely with the counter-terrorists of the Extreme Right. Its chiefs sometimes disapproved of the “unauthorized” assassinations of liberal politicians carried out by the Rightist Black Hundred gangs, but they generally cooperated in organizing the anti-Semitic pogroms that were the main raison d’être of the extremist bands. The most glaring instance of this co-operation—and perhaps the most striking symptom of the moral regression provoked by the 1905 revolution—occurred in Kiev in 1911. Local “patriotic”—i.e. extremist—organizations accused a Jew named Mendel Beiliss of having murdered a little Christian boy to obtain his blood for ritual purposes. (There is an ancient and tenacious folk legend in parts of Eastern Europe that human—and gentile—blood is used in the preparation of matzoth.)

Finding that the evidence presented by the local patriots was a trifle flimsy, the Kiev authorities appealed to St. Petersburg for help. The Imperial Minister of Justice, M. Shcheslovitov, took a keen personal interest in the case. He not only made it clear to the prosecutor that a conviction was expected, but arranged that the Okhrana send a team of agents to Kiev to help “collect” better evidence, and also, apparently, to rig the jury. In a memorandum to the Czar, Shcheslovitov affirmed that the examining magistrate in Kiev had information from an unimpeachable source establishing the guilt of Beiliss. The Okhrana drew on its secret funds to bring an obscure religious fanatic from distant Tashkent to testify as an expert witness at the trial. The expert, an Orthodox pope named Pranaitis, a self-appointed authority on Hebraic tradition, solemnly maintained in court that ritual murder was not only enjoined by various esoteric Jewish texts, but was sanctioned by the Old Testament itself. Despite—or because of—the demential nonsense to which it had to listen, and the heavy pressures to which it was subjected, the jury finally acquitted the defendant.

At the session of the investigating committee in 1917 when Shcheslovitov confessed his role in the affair, one of the jurists on it asked the former Minister of Justice a loaded but pertinent question: “Didn’t you realize that the indictment [of Beiliss] was at the same time an indictment of the religious convictions of millions of our fellow citizens? Didn’t you consider in general that this indictment was a disgrace to Russia, because in the twentieth century it served as a basis for a trial worthy of the Middle Ages?”

“No,” replied Shcheslovitov.

Yet this deluded and dishonest guardian of the law was not himself a backwoods fanatic. He was an eminent jurist, an intelligent and cultivated man. He had once been a civilized one. Before 1905 he had even been a liberal, and more than once had courageously opposed the Czarist establishment, according to B. Maklakov, who edited the proceedings of the 1917 committee and wrote a judicious commentary upon them.


Okhrana supporting Nazis since at least 1905



...The infiltration of the police and the secret-service outlook into the higher policy-making levels of the Czarist state was no less evident in foreign than in domestic affairs. The Okhrana was particularly active in Paris, a major center of émigré revolutionary activities. It operated much as the GPU and the MVD were later to do. The chief agent was usually attached to the Russian Embassy with the rank of counselor; he rendered no accounts to the ambassador but was authorized to correspond with his chiefs through the diplomatic pouch. Co-operation between the Okhrana unit in Paris and the French Sureté was always close in the pre-war years. The Sureté helped one Okhrana official set up a special Franco-Russian organization, disguised as a private-detective agency, to spy on the émigrés. The Okhrana likewise organized, without protest from the French authorities, a French branch of the Russian “patriotic” organizations called the League for the Salvation of the Fatherland, which co-operated with French right-wing extremists like the Royalist Camelots du Roi.


Okhrana infiltrating French, Russian policy-making circles


...To neutralize the chronic protest of French Socialists and Liberals against its operations on French soil, the Okhrana bribed French newspapers and journalists of the right who were willing to follow a pro-Russian line. According to an exposé of the Okhrana written in 1919 by one of its former senior officials, V. K. Agafonov, it financed a journalists’ club in Paris and paid regular subsidies to several important French newspapers, including the Echo de Paris, the Gaulois, and the Figaro. The last-named organ, according to Agafonov, for a while received 24,000 rubles—about $10,000—monthly from the Okhrana.


Okhrana buying off journalists


When Izvolsky took over the Russian Embassy in Paris he promoted an arrangement with the French government for influencing French opinion that was more official, but hardly less conspiratorial, than the crude undercover operations of the Okhrana: the Russians would open a special credit, drawn upon the Czar’s secret funds, for the French government, which would then undertake to buy up the consciences—and the pens—of its own journalists in behalf of joint objectives. A letter sent by the Russian Prime Minister in October 1912 to his French opposite number—at that time Poincaré—pointed out one of the advantages of the proposed system: It would help keep within bounds “certain appetites and certain rivalries” in the French press which the Russians had learned from bitter experience were apt to be stirred up when they approached foreign journalists directly.


Poincare cool with buying-off journalists?


There was another advantage that the Russian communication did not spell out but which Poincaré may have been able to read between the lines. Izvolsky looked upon the dry, little Lorrainer, with his implacable irredentism, as the heaven-sent instrument of Russian foreign policy in France—“If Poincaré were defeated it would be a catastrophe for us,” he warned St. Petersburg before the French presidential elections of 1913—and one of the secret objectives of the press campaign that Russia was proposing to finance was to combat the “pacifist”—we would say today “appeasement”—and therefore anti-Poincaré, elements in French public life. “Do not forget,” Izvolsky once wrote his nominal chief in St. Petersburg, “that Poincare has to struggle with very influential elements in his own party which are generally hostile to Russia and openly preach that France must not be dragged into any war arising out of Balkan affairs.” To the degree that the Russian propaganda-credit was likely to aid Poincaré in his “struggles,” and thereby to help his political career, it came perilously near to being a personal bribe to him, as well as to the French journalists who were actually to pocket the funds.


Poincare Okhrana stooge, to help with "any war arising out of Balkan affairs"


Despite this slightly sordid implication, Poincaré, who was normally more fastidious, received a secret emissary of the Russian treasury and worked out with him and Izvolsky an agreement in principle for handling a Russian slush fund of 300,000 gold francs (about $60,000). An official of the French Ministry of the Interior was appointed to deal with the Russians in the matter, but it was some time before both parties could agree on details. The Russian officials thought their French colleagues were too generous with the Czar’s funds in proposing to pay some $600 monthly for three months to the editors of several relatively obscure dailies with which certain male or female protégés of various French politicians had particularly close connections. When the first Balkan war broke out in October 1912, however, Izvolsky, fearing that a general European crisis was imminent, relented and urged that $20,000 be released to the French without too close scrutiny as to how it was spent


wonder what happened during first Balkan war? maybe worth looking into


...After the Revolution the Soviets published an aptly termed Black Book of Izvolsky’s official correspondence which was largely intended as an exposé of the secret diplomacy that had brought the Old World to its downfall. The indictment, it must be admitted, is a damning one, but the illustration is perhaps too extreme; Izvolsky was not conducting mere secret diplomacy in Paris, but a kind of diplomatic conspiracy. What made it sinister was not so much its aims as its methods. Neither he nor Poincaré was deliberately plotting a European war, but the fact that their relations constituted a kind of permanent plot, meticulously concealed from public opinion and by passing constitutional controls in both nations, had a great deal to do with making war inevitable.


is this related to the "secret treaty?"

The conspiratorial toxins generated by the dying Russian autocracy contaminated Russia’s relations with her allies—and sometimes the allies, too—just as they corrupted the revolutionary opposition at home. Aside from its moral implications, all this plotting and counterplotting contributed to the administrative breakdown of the Czarist state and to the fragmentation of authority. The Czar could not control the Okhrana; the Okhrana could not control its own agents—though it controlled some that Lenin thought were his. The Minister in St. Petersburg officially responsible for conducting Russia’s foreign relations was dominated and manipulated by his nominal subordinate, the Ambassador to France, but the Paris Embassy could not be, even unofficially, the co-ordinating center for the Russian diplomatic service.


who controls who?


Czarist diplomacy with its supporting networks of spies and secret police and undercover propagandists was probably more unscrupulous than most others in pre-war Europe, but its cardinal sin was the irresponsibility which almost of necessity permeates any system that functions to a considerable degree through invisible chains of command—especially multiple ones. Conspiracy involves never letting the right hand know what the left hand is doing. On occasion this averts unpleasantness, but at other times it can be dangerous—for instance, if the left hand happens to light a match at the moment that the right one is manipulating slabs of cordite. Russian diplomatic and paradiplomatic operations in the Balkans between 1909 and 1914 furnish the classic example.


Okhrana started WW1?


------

...The foundations for a new Russian policy in south-eastern Europe were laid by Izvolsky, himself, before he quit St. Petersburg, and it seems probable that he conceived it as a kind of diplomatic revenge for the humiliations that Austria and Germany had inflicted on Russia after the Bosnian crisis of 1908-1909. The Czar and the Russian new Foreign Minister, Sazonov, do not seem to have understood it in so aggressive a spirit, but the Russian minister in Belgrade, N. H. de Hartwig, almost certainly did; he was an ardent Pan-Slavist and had been specially picked for his critical post by Izvolsky. The avowed aim of the policy was to encourage better relations between Serbia and Bulgaria, and thereby to promote stability in the Balkans; the real aim—at least in Hartwig’s mind—was somewhat less idyllic. It was expressed in a secret annex to a defensive treaty signed in March 1912 between the two chief Balkan rivals. This annex provided for carving up Turkish Macedonia between Bulgaria and Serbia; one of its clauses stipulated that the Czar’s arbitration would be accepted for any contested territories—a foresighted arrangement, in view of Balkan history.


...Sazonov tried to reassure him by declaring that Russia had the right to veto any aggressions projected by the Balkan allies, and would not hesitate to do so. Despite this assurance, Serbia and Bulgaria, their appetites whetted by Turkey’s impending defeat in the Tripolitanian war (started by Italy’s invasion of Tripolitania in 1911), broadened their alliance into a coalition with Greece and Montenegro, and opened hostilities in October 1912—without, of course, a Russian veto, and without any significant manifestations of Poincaré’s displeasure.

In one sense the French President had been unusually prophetic, but in another he had overestimated the danger. The Balkan war produced a violent European crisis that gave the Kaiser a chance to do some more saber-rattling, and it left the whole diplomatic situation in Europe in a more precarious state than ever, but the only other war that came out of it directly was a second one in the Balkans. The first one ended with the defeat of Turkey and its virtual eviction from Europe, but the victorious allies, as might have been expected, almost immediately fell to squabbling over the loot. Bulgaria attacked Serbia and Greece; Rumania, which had been left out of the first conflict, attacked Bulgaria, and the Turks naturally joined in, hoping to recoup their losses. When it was all over, Turkey had lost a good deal of mountainous real estate; Bulgaria, Montenegro, Rumania and especially Greece had gained some; Serbia had acquired more than 1,000,000 new subjects but her dream of getting a window on the Adriatic had been blocked, at Austrian insistence, by the creation of an independent Albania. The map of the Balkans had changed, but not the political climate; everyone continued to hate everyone else, perhaps a little more bitterly than before.


setting up war in the Balkans, get everyone to hate each other


...Russians: if German military power with the connivance of a puppet Turkish government established itself astride the Dardanelles, it would be a threat not only to Russia’s ambitions but even to her security. An imperial crown council held in St. Petersburg on February 21, 1914 came to the gloomy conclusion that only a general European war would enable Russia to realize her “historic aims”—i.e. seizure of Constantinople and control of the straits. The same council estimated, however, that Russia would not be adequately prepared to face a major conflict for at least two or three years. This estimate, while it did not basically modify Russia’s Balkan policy, injected a note of prudent realism into it that was apparent even in Belgrade. Unfortunately, this was true only of official Russian policy—the right-hand one. The left-hand policy remained as reckless as ever—particularly in Belgrade.


decide they need a "general european war" to get Constantinople

	For several years Hartwig, the Russian Minister, had worked with both hands to build up the Balkan coalition against Turkey and to encourage Serbian ambitions for uniting the South Slavs, under Serb leadership, at the expense of Austria-Hungary. With the right hand he pursued these objectives through his normal diplomatic contacts with King Peter, Crown Prince Alexander, and the Serbian government. With the left hand—especially through his military attaché, Colonel (later General) Victor Artamanov—he gave financial, paramilitary and other kinds of support to ostensibly private but actually semiofficial organizations of what were euphemistically termed Serbian nationalists (in Austrian, Turkish, and Bulgarian eyes, they were Great-Serbian imperialists).

	The most fateful of these Russian-supported irredentist, or expansionist, groups in Serbia was a secret society that called itself Union or Death but which was popularly known as the Black Hand, because of its conspiratorial mentality and organization. According to its statutes, the Black Hand aimed at achieving the union of “all the Serbs,” including, of course, those of Turkish or Bulgarian Macedonia, and those living in Bosnia and elsewhere in the Dual Monarchy. At home it operated as an extremist pressure group dedicated to the task of committing Serbian official circles and Serbian public opinion to Serbia’s proposed mission as “the Piedmont of the South Slavs”—i.e. playing the same role in South Slav unification that the kingdom of Savoy had played in Italian unification. Beyond Serbia’s borders the Black Hand sought to promote its objectives by subversive action with emphasis on terrorism rather than what it somewhat contemptuously termed “intellectual propaganda.” With such a program, the Black Hand had to organize itself and to operate along conspiratorial lines, though the Balkan love of conspiracy for its own sake no doubt was responsible for some of its more melodramatic trimmings. Members were known to each other only by number, they swore extravagant oaths of secrecy and blind obedience, and observed colorful rites borrowed from the Freemasons, the nineteenth-century Italian Carbonari, and similar sources.


Hartwig and Artamanov pushing for coalition against turkey while supporting Black hand behind their back


	Despite all these operetta flourishes, Union or Death was a serious organization of serious-minded and influential men. Its members were fanatics, but political fanaticism in the Balkans was neither abnormal nor discreditable. The army was strongly represented in the society, and its head was none other than Colonel Dragutin Dimitrijevic, the chief of the military intelligence department of the Serbian Army. For several years, in fact, the Black Hand was an unofficial auxiliary of the Serbian Army—and to a lesser degree of the Serbian foreign office. Dimitrijevic, known in conspiratorial circles as Apis, seems to have got into the habit of switching hats—the military one and the Black Hand one—so casually that neither his colleagues on the executive committee of Union or Death, nor his superiors in the army, ever knew exactly what he was doing. By playing one connection against the other, he was able to exploit the considerable assets of both without being subject to the control of either—a situation that was wholly to his taste.



Apis cheif of military intelligence as well as heading black hand


	...It was particularly from his own government that Apis needed to conceal his role in organizing the murder—perhaps that is the deepest reason why he chose to rely upon amateurs rather than to utilize the professional killers that he unquestionably had available in Bosnia. Sarajevo was the result of a secret-service plot, but it was not plotted by a responsible secret service; Apis was not wearing his military hat when he sent the Princip group on its fatal mission. It is not even certain that he was wearing the Black Hand hat; according to some accounts, when the Black Hand executive committee learned what he had dispatched the young Bosnians to do, it ordered him, by a majority vote, to call them back (if such an order was actually given, Apis disregarded it).


Apis Ferdinand assassination op super secret

	The Serbian government, that is Apis’ enemy, Prime Minister Pasic, learned of the assassination plot through a secret informer planted inside the Black Hand, and actually took official steps to block its execution. Instructions were wired to the Serbian Minister in Vienna to warn the Austrian government. The warning could not expose the role of the Black Hand or give any details that would enable the Austrians to arrest the killers before they could strike—otherwise Pasic and the Serbian Minister would have been signing their own death warrants. Accidentally or not, the Serbian Minister sabotaged Belgrade’s instructions, by the vague and bumbling way in which he delivered the warning. The Austrian government official to whom he delivered it—the Joint Finance Minister, responsible for administration in Bosnia—did not appreciate its full gravity, though he passed it on, after a fashion. Austrian red tape and Schlamperei did the rest; the administrative anarchy of the disintegrating Habsburg power fatally coincided with the disorganized backwardness of the nascent Yugoslav power.


Serbian government supposedly wanted to stop the assassination, in opposition to Black Hand (who wanted to overthrow them), delivered warning but bungled it


	...The deepest unresolved mystery of Sarajevo is the degree of direct Russian guilt in the assassination. Did Hartwig, the Russian minister, or Artamanov, his military attaché, know in advance what Apis was plotting? Albertini demonstrates convincingly that it is most unlikely Hartwig was informed of the murder plot. Artamanov is another story—a very queer and confused story. There Is some testimony that he not only knew Apis was organizing the assassination, but that he asked St. Petersburg for approval—and got it. After the war, and the Russian Revolution, Albertini—whose dogged quest for the truth about the origins of the conflict is as fascinating as a good detective story—found Artamanov, then a retired general, living in Yugoslavia, and asked him point-blank if his was the hand behind the hands that launched the war. It must have been an extraordinary interview. Artamanov admitted His close co-operation with Apis, but denied that he had been consulted about the assassination. He declared that he had been away from Belgrade on leave in Switzerland and Italy for some time before the crime was perpetrated, and to back this up, showed the Italian sleuth-historian his diary for the months of June and July, 1914. It contained no mention of the tragedy at Sarajevo. For the fateful date of July 24, there was merely the laconic note, “Austrian ultimatum to Serbia,” followed, Albertini says, by the usual statement of Artamanov’s daily expenses: “coffee-2 lire.”


Albertini interviewed a whole bunch of people. Believes Hartwig was most likely not informed of plot.


	Albertini came away from the interview unconvinced. The general impressed him as being not overly intelligent and without much character. He remained puzzled by Artamanov’s continued absence from Belgrade after the crime and during the early days of the European crisis it engendered; indeed this was a strangely prolonged vacation.


Albertini ondered where Artamanov was, questioned his unusual vacation


	Albertini’s final conclusion is that Artamanov was informed of the plot and did nothing to obstruct it. Contrary to some sources, the Italian historian does not believe Artamanov gave assurances to Apis that Serbia could count on Russian military aid in case the crime led to war with Austria. Whether Artamanov—nr Werchovski—reported the assassination plan to anyone in St. Petersburg is still a wide-open question. He—or they—might have informed the Russian Minister for War, General Sukhomlinov, who for reasons of his own, did not pass it on to the Czar. Perhaps the recipient of the information—if there was one—was some unofficial but powerful behind-stage personality in Russia: one of the more bellicose Grand Dukes, or even one of the still more bellicose Grand Duchesses. Per-haps it was simply lost somewhere in the Russian bureaucratic labyrinth. Anything is possible. It is even conceivable that Artamanov decided to keep the whole thing a little secret between his friend Apis and himself. The moral and administrative decay of Romanov Russia had reached the point by mid-1914 when it was conceivable not only for the left hand to act in affairs of the gravest importance without the right hand knowing what it was doing, but for one of the fingers of the left hand, twitching independently of the rest, to pull the trigger that detonated a world war.


Albertini concludes Artamanov knew of plot, did nothing to stop it. Maybe others in Russian bureaucracy knew too.



------

	...For more than a week after Sarajevo, Austrian policy teetered on the brink of decision. Vienna seethed with excitement. Anti-Serbian sentiment, kindled by a majority of the press, ran strong, and several demonstrations took place in front of the Serbian Embassy, where the flag at half-mast seemed to the crowd an infuriating piece of hypocrisy. Francis Joseph, who returned to his summer villa at Ischl a few days after the funeral, remained, however, unmoved by the tumult in his capital.


Vienna press kindling anti-Serbian sentiment


	...Conrad had been a great nuisance to Berchtold for years, badgering him with secret memoranda on the theme of “Serbia delenda est” But after the two Balkan wars, in which Austria had cut a sorry figure, and the Foreign Minister had come in for much criticism, he had swung over to Conrad’s views, much to the delight of the select society of lesser counts (the war counts, as they were known) which peopled the offices of the Ballplatz and liked to imitate Poldi’s mania of drinking iced coffee (brought up specially from Demel’s Café) at all hours of the day.


Taylor talks about some of the scummy people in Vienna who were pro-war

	...Francis Joseph, too, needed to be spoken to in the right way. But he was much less easily swayed than the Kaiser. Conrad, who once again tried to persuade him that war with Serbia was unavoidable, was received by him on July 5 and found him in a very skeptical frame of mind.


Conrad trying to get people to jump on war bandwagon?


	...“He quite understood that His Imperial and Royal Apostolic Majesty with his well-known love of peace, would find it hard to march into Serbia, but if we have really recognized the necessity of military measures against Serbia, he [the Kaiser] would deplore our not taking advantage of the present moment, which is so favorable to us.”


Kaiser pushed for war


Austrian politicians come up with sleezy schemes, rapacious "ultimatum" for Serbia

	...A tragic accident in Belgrade may have heightened the dangers that were inherent from the first in Berchtold’s recklessly calculated risk. On July 10, Baron Vladimir von Giesl, the Austrian Minister in Belgrade who had been recalled to Vienna for consultation, returned to his post. At 9 o’clock that evening he received an unexpected call from his Russian opposite number, the redoubtable Nicolas Henrikovitch de Hartwig. The Russian Minister said that he had come to express his condolences “for the atrocious outrage” (Sarajevo), but there were undoubtedly other things that he wanted to say. What they were we shall never know. At 9:20 P.M., just as Giesl was launching into a soothing—and quite false—interpretation of Austria’s attitude toward Serbia, Hartwig suddenly slumped to the floor, unconscious. He was dead when a doctor examined him a few minutes later (he was overweight, and had suffered from angina pectoris for some years). An unpleasant scene ensued after the arrival of Hartwig’s daughter, Ludmilla. She brusquely repulsed the sympathy expressed by the Giesls, and poked about the room, sniffing at an eau de cologne bottle, and rummaging in some large Japanese vases. Her father had smoked only his own Russian cigarettes, but Ludmilla had wrapped up the two butts and put them in her bag. Had her father had anything to eat or drink? she asked with unveiled suspicion. In the tense atmosphere of the time, public rumor immediately made a poisoner of the unfortunate Giesl, who was even accused of having brought back from Vienna an electric chair which instantly killed anyone sitting in it.

	Hartwig had inside knowledge of the Serbian Black Hand and its methods (the Austrians were strangely uninformed on the subject, though the alert French Minister in Belgrade had already been able to ferret out for his government the Black Hand’s role in the Sarajevo assassinations). As was noted in a previous chapter, he is believed to have broken off his originally close relationship with the fanatical brotherhood’s head, Colonel Apis, and in general, to have started putting the brakes on extreme Serbian nationalism, which he had earlier encouraged. His influence on the Serbian government was enormous; if his personal outlook on the Balkan problem had really changed as much as many historians think, his death at that crucial moment was undoubtedly a catastrophe for Europe. Giesl himself believed so. He later wrote that if Hartwig had lived beyond the “critical 25th of July,” the war would not have occurred.


Hartwig knew of Apis schemes, "puting the brakes" on Serbian extremism, said that he would have opposed the war, suspected of being poisoned after call to Austrian Minister in Belgrade, rumors started that Austrian minister responsible.

What did Hartwig tell Giesl? Taylor makes it sound like Hartwig wanted to stop the war. Did Giesl?

If Hartwig wanted to stop the war, you'd think he'd just tell Giesl that it was Apis and the Black Hand acting outside of the Serbian government.

But if that's what he told Giesl, apparently Giesl didn't act on it, and went on to give a "false account" of Austria's intentions.

	...Encouraging news from St. Petersburg earlier in the day had made the Serbian leaders feel that in rejecting dishonor they were not necessarily accepting death for their little nation,


Russia told Serbia they would back them in an invasion. Giesl broke off diplomatic relations.


	...The bolder Austria became, and the more strongly she was supported, “the more likely Russia is to keep quiet,” said Herr Gottlieb von Jagow, the German Secretary of State (Foreign Minister).

	On this theory, Bethmann-Hollweg—a political lightweight a bare notch above Berchtold’s level—Jagow, and the German General Staff kept trying to prod Austria into hostilities before anyone could intervene. The intervention which they probably feared the most was that of their master, the Kaiser, and they took care that the information of the developing international crisis which reached him on board the Hohenzollern was as little, and as late, as possible. (One more illustration of how fictitious the Kaiser’s claim to supreme responsibility had become.) No direct German interests were involved in the dispute between Austria and Serbia. Berlin officialdom was trying to push Germany’s Austrian allies into war for their own good, and to strengthen the alliance. The Habsburg Empire was visibly crumbling, the Wilhelmstrasse argued; only military victory over the forces of South Slav irredentism could save it. To achieve this result the risk of a general European conflict had to be accepted.


more pushing for war for dubious reasons

	...Russia, through the mouth of her Foreign Minister, Sazonov, made a statement in St. Petersburg that sounded ominous by its very restraint: “Russia cannot allow Austria to crush Serbia and become the predominant power in the Balkans.”


sounds like Russia was pretty clear on support for Serbia

	...Lichnowsky’s dispatch reached the Wilhelmstrasse at about the same moment as a message from Vienna informing the German government that Austria would declare war on Serbia the next day, or at the latest on July 29. Thereupon Bethmann-Hollweg committed either an incredible blunder, or—as Albertini and some other historians believe—an act of almost equally incredible duplicity. Acting upon instructions from the Kaiser, he forwarded to Vienna Sir Edward Grey’s suggestion about German good offices, but on his own initiative he omitted a key passage in the message he had received from the German Embassy in London which stressed the seriousness of the British warning, and he failed to indicate any official German endorsement of the suggestion; he merely asked for the Austrian views about it. He even allowed his colleague, Jagow, to call in the Austrian Ambassador, and in effect to advise him that the Austrians should pay no attention to any British suggestions that Berlin might feel obliged, for the sake of the record, to forward. (The Ambassador, of course, immediately transmitted the advice to Vienna.)



Bethman-Hollweg sabotages warnings to Vienna that London would get involved

	...On the same fatal July 27, Berchtold had obtained Francis Joseph’s signature to a declaration of war against Serbia. To overcome the eighty-four-year-old Emperor’s lingering doubts, he had sent a telegram to Bad Ischl reporting a completely fictitious Serbian attack upon an Austro-Hungarian border detachment (though whether the Austrian premier deliberately faked the incident to deceive his master has never been established). Thus, on the morning of July 28, when Berchtold received the British Ambassador—at about the same moment the Kaiser in Potsdam was coming to the conclusion that war between Austria-Hungary and Serbia was both unnecessary and dangerous—it was to tell him that it was now unfortunately too late for any attempts at mediation, since His Royal and Imperial Apostolic Majesty had already signed the declaration of war.


Berchtold makes up Serbian attack on Austro-Hungarian border detachment, declares war before British Ambassador can get there

	...Like his fellow autocrats Wilhelm II and Francis Joseph, Nicholas II of Russia dreaded war. “Everything possible must be done to save peace,” he told a member of his entourage just after he had received an alarming telegram from the Kaiser. “I will not become responsible for a monstrous slaughter.” Unfortunately, though he was theoretically the most absolute of all the European despots, the Czar had no more real control over events than the others had. The reactionary, militarist, and fanatically Pan-Slav clique that Nicholas relied upon to save the autocracy included many influential officers or officials who were bent on pushing him into a ruinous war.


officers in Russia also pushing towards war


	...Even before the sheer velocity of events became intolerable, the Russian Foreign Minister, Sazonov, a slight, shallow, conscientious man with a close-trimmed beard and a sharp foxlike face that made him look cleverer and more tricky than he was, had committed a momentous blunder. After the Austrian ultimatum to Serbia he obtained the agreement of the Cabinet and the approval of the Czar to the principle of a partial mobilization of Russian forces—involving a little over 1,000,000 men—along the Austrian border. This move, Sazonov argued, might scare the Austrians out of attacking Serbia, but would not threaten Germany, and in any case a soothing note to Berlin would accompany public announcement of the call-up.

	Orders to put the limited mobilization in effect throughout four southern districts were supposed to go out on July 29, the day after the Austro-Hungarian declaration of war against Serbia. The Russian General Staff, however, had developed second thoughts about partial mobilization. There was a serious risk, its chief told Sazonov, that such limited measures would throw out of kilter the cumbersome machinery of military administration and thus compromise eventual full-scale mobilization if the latter should become necessary. At this point, Sazonov, as a man of peace, should have withdrawn his original proposal and insisted on canceling any form of mobilization; the Czar would almost certainly have backed him. Instead, he suddenly veered around to the military viewpoint and joined the generals in urging the Czar to decree general mobilization at once. Nicholas at first consented, then at 9:30 on the evening of July 29, just as the official telegrams transmitting the order of mobilization to all the military headquarters of the Empire were about to be sent, he dispatched an officer to the central telegraph bureau to stop them and to substitute the original order of partial mobilization.


Sazonov pushed for mobilization, arguing it wouldn't antagonize Germany.

Russia said that would back Serbia, but I guess backing Serbia is different from an invasion of Austria?

maybe not the right way to look at it

sounds like at this point war was declared, but some though the situation could be saved, a wider conflict avoided. But wide-scale Russian mobilization would spark a wider conflict.

	...The proposal for arbitration by the Hague Tribunal had no chance of acceptance—“Rubbish,” Willy scrawled on the margin of the dispatch—but at that particular moment in the European crisis any move that offered a hope of postponing the eventual showdown was important. The Czar’s telegram came on the heels of a message from London which had rocked, not only the Kaiser, but even Bethmann-Hollweg and the Wilhelmstrasse. “So long as the conflict remains confined to Austria and Russia we can stand aside,” Grey had told the German Ambassador. “But if Germany and France should be involved, then the British government would be forced to make up its mind quickly.” If the Czar had stuck to his refusal not to let Russian mobilization go beyond the limited call-up in the south, peace might have been saved (although the Russian Generals had already begun surreptitiously to exceed the terms of the Imperial ukase). But between 3 and 4 P.M. on July 30, just as Bethmann-Hollweg in Berlin was drafting new instructions to his Ambassador in Vienna advising him that Germany “must decline to be drawn wantonly into a world conflagration without having any regard paid to our counsels,” Nicholas’ vacillant will suddenly buckled.

	It was Sazonov who effected this fatal result. Accompanied by a staff officer, he came to the Peterhof Palace, some 17 miles out of the capital, to try to convince the Czar that general mobilization could no longer be delayed. For more than an hour, in deferential but urgent tones, he marshaled his arguments in favor of mobilization. He had two particularly strong ones: a somewhat vague report that Germany, too, had begun to mobilize, and the arrogant tone of the Kaiser’s latest telegram declaring that he could not mediate in Vienna if Russia went ahead with the partial mobilization against Austria.

	...“Think of the responsibility you are asking me to take if I follow your advice!” he finally exclaimed. “Think what it means to send thousands and thousands of men to their death.”

	Unluckily, Sazonov’s companion, General Tatishev, chose that moment to speak up.

	“Yes, it is a terrible decision to take,” he said.

	“I am the one who decides,” Nicholas snapped.

	From then on he seemed more attentive to Sazonov’s arguments. He was particularly impressed by the Foreign Minister’s view—an erroneous one we now know—that Germany was bent on war and would go ahead whether Russia mobilized or not. At last, after what seemed a terrible inner struggle, the Czar gave in.

	“All right, Serge Dimitrievitch,” he said, “telephone the Chief of the General Staff that I give the order for general mobilization.”


Sazonov first argues mobilization wouldn't antagonize Germany, later argues Germany was mobilizing anyway


------

	...Ferry, who was killed by a German shell in 1918, turned out to be almost right as far as France was concerned. Several mutinous divisions from the Champagne front, singing the Socialist anthem, L’Internationale, started to march on the capital and were only turned back in the nick of time. To restore discipline in the demoralized French Army drumhead courts-martial handed down 253 death sentences—sometimes virtually at random—though it is claimed that only 25 of them were actually carried out. Elsewhere in Europe the tide of revolutionary defeatism steadily mounted, as Ferry had predicted.

	The loss of faith in leadership, including military leadership, on the part of the European masses was one of the most significant results of World War I.

This what Lenin was hoping for?


	Its full effects were not to become apparent for another generation—the debased form of pacifism which paralyzed French and British resistance to the aggressive expansionism of Nazi Germany in 1938, and partially paralyzed it in 1939, was an emotional hangover from the 1914—1918 war—but even its immediate fruits were momentous. Naturally, it was the most anachronistic leadership-systems—i.e. the Divine Right autocratic dynasties and their supporting aristocracies—which were the most vulnerable to the blasts of doubt and revolt blowing from the battlefields. A few reigning monarchs-in particular young King Alexander I of Serbia, and Albert I, King of the Belgians—saved the prestige of their dynasties by the way in which they shared the hardships of their subjects, but the Habsburgs, the Hohenzollerns, and the Romanovs, along with other handicaps, lacked the common touch.



------

	The Germans furthermore propagandized Russian prisoners of war on a vast scale—one of the agents used for this work was Roman Malinovsky, the former colleague of Lenin and of the Okhrana. In return for the German help the Bolshevik underground in Russia, with or without Lenin’s knowledge, supplied the Germans with what they considered valuable intelligence reports, (there are explicit references to them in the Wilhelmstrasse files).

	Taylor, Edmond. The Fall Of The Dynasties: The Collapse Of The Old Order, 1905-1922 [Illustrated Edition] (Kindle Locations 5854-5858). Verdun Press. Kindle Edition. 

Malinovsky working with Germans too?

	...The Germans showed themselves understanding and co-operative on all these points. Their realization of the need to protect the reputations of the travelers is brought out in several of the Wilhelmstrasse documents. The military and police authorities raised no pedantic issue of “security”; it was assuring the security of the émigrés that mainly seemed to cause them concern. The final decision to authorize the trip was referred to the highest governmental and military authorities, including Ludendorff and the Kaiser. Judging from a memorandum in the Foreign Office files, Wilhelm took a keen, if somewhat fatuous, interest in the operation. “His Majesty the Kaiser,” records the memorandum, “suggested at breakfast today that the Russian Socialists traveling through Germany should be given White Books and other literature, such as copies of the Easter Message and of the Chancellor’s speech, so that they may be able to enlighten others in their own country. In the event of the Russians being refused entry into Sweden, the High Command


Wilhelm thinking Bolshevisk would help him out?

	...LENIN’S ENTRY INTO RUSSIA SUCCESSFUL, a telegram from the German Ambassador in Stockholm reported on April 17. HE IS WORKING EXACTLY AS WE WOULD WISH.

	Perhaps if the German political warriors had seen the verbatim text of Lenin’s remarks at the Finland Station their admiration at their own cleverness might have been tinctured with some slight uneasiness for the more distant future.


looks like it


	...On the day that the German counteroffensive started, a left-wing insurrection against the Provisional Government broke out in Petrograd. It was spearheaded by anarchist sailors from the Kronstadt naval base, and covertly supported—possibly instigated—by the Bolsheviks. For a few hours the result was in doubt. Then the government collected a sufficient force of Cossacks and other loyal troops and after three days of fighting in the streets stamped out the rebellion. Lenin went into hiding, eventually escaping to Finland. Trotsky and several other Bolshevik leaders, who had scorned flight, were imprisoned and the Bolshevik headquarters in the palace of the dancer Ksesinskaya—the early flame of Nicholas II—was closed down. The party paper, Pravda, was suppressed. The leftist fiasco in the July days, as the abortive uprising is usually termed, temporarily saved the Provisional Government from the consequences of the debacle at the front, and brought Kerensky to the Premiership—he succeeded Prince Lvov on July 20. The Bolshevik role in the disorders had destroyed any remaining illusions Kerensky may have had about Lenin, Trotsky, and their companions as being “normal” Socialist leaders, just a little more extreme in their views perhaps, than others. The Bolsheviks, Kerensky now realized, were ruthless and incorrigible conspirators. Evidence collected by the Russian military counterespionage service purporting to establish that Lenin was a paid German agent played a big part in this phase of Kerensky’s political education. With his acute sense of propaganda he made the dubious information the basis for a violent campaign against the Bolsheviks, accusing them—among other crimes—of having deliberately fomented the July rising on orders from their German employers

	Taylor, Edmond. The Fall Of The Dynasties: The Collapse Of The Old Order, 1905-1922 [Illustrated Edition] (Kindle Locations 6094-6106). Verdun Press. Kindle Edition. 


and he kindof did-in line with Lenin's theories of using the war to "destroy the government"

is this how Lenin thought war would help him? distract Russian army?


	...His fiery appeals to drive the usurpers out of the capital led to a piecemeal and improvised counter-offensive that was doomed before it started. Many of the Russian generals who still retained some authority over their troops refused all support to the man they considered mainly responsible for the country’s misfortunes,


blamed countries misfortunes on Kerensky


------

	...On the day—November 8, 1917—Lenin took office as chairman of the Provisional Government’s revolutionary successor, the Council of People’s Commissars, his chance of remaining in power for more than a few weeks seemed slight. The Bolshevik dictatorship had only the flimsiest juridical basis, it possessed no overwhelming military strength, it was hated or despised by most of the nation’s officialdom, and it lacked the support of public opinion. In the elections for the Constituent Assembly on November 25—the date had been fixed before the Bolshevik coup d’état—the Bolsheviks polled a little less than a quarter of the national vote. The chief victors were the Social-Revolutionaries who won 370 out of 707 seats, while the Bolsheviks won 175, and the dissident left-wing Social-Revolutionaries, their only political allies, obtained 40. As Leonard Schapiro observes, more than half the country had voted for Socialism, but against Bolshevism. In the face of this result Lenin proceeded to demonstrate the essential difference between the Bolsheviks and nearly all other Socialists: their contempt for democratic principles. When the Constituent Assembly met on January 18, 1918, and a Bolshevik resolution supported by the dissident Social-Revolutionaries, was rejected, Lenin ordered the meeting hall to be occupied by Red Guards and locked out the delegates. That was the end of Russian democracy.

------


	...For the Bolsheviks, the awakening was terrible. As a starter the Central Powers demanded that Russia cede Poland and the Baltic territories. Recognition of Finnish independence was soon added to the conditions. Then came the crusher: Russia must also recognize the independence of the Ukraine, which had been proclaimed by the anti-Bolshevik and pro-German local government in Kiev on January 1. Some of the Austrian and even German delegates felt that the precarious Soviet regime was being strained to the breaking point, but this did not worry General Ludendorff, the occult dictator of Germany and the real author of the Brest-Litovsk diktat. “Paranoia had him [Ludendorff] in its grip,” declares John W. Wheeler-Bennett in his masterly Brest-Litovsk: The Forgotten Peace, and the diagnosis seems plausible. Ludendorff’s ultimate aim was the total dismemberment of Russia and though this objective implied the final liquidation of the Romanov dynasty it had seemingly been approved by the Kaiser.


Ludendorff pushes for hard-line in Brest-Litovsk, probably helps foment Russian-German conflict later

	...Finally on March 3 after the German armies had resumed their advance, and were nearing Petrograd, the Soviet government accepted Ludendorff’s terms, signing away more than a quarter of Russia’s national territory and some 75 per cent of her coal and steel plants.


really bad deal

	...The dissident Social Revolutionaries resigned from the government in protest against accepting such conditions, and the Bolsheviks themselves were badly split. Lenin had the greatest difficulty in persuading Trotsky to give up his dreams of resisting the German Army by sabotage and guerrilla warfare. The Whites in the south, encouraged by the demonstration of Bolshevik weakness and enraged by what they considered the Bolshevik betrayal of the national cause openly raised the standard of counter-revolution, with French and British support.


heat up the civil war? would make sense for French and British to oppose Bolsheviks given Brest-Litovsk


	...Opposed within his own party, repudiated by his only allies, under armed attack by his counterrevolutionary enemies, Lenin, who had moved the seat of the government to Moscow in March 1918, realized that in submitting to the peace of Brest-Litovsk, Soviet Russia became for the time being a hostage of Imperial Germany. The Bolshevik power could only survive as long as the German Army was willing to see it survive. A policy of co-operation, almost of partnership, with Germany was therefore a vital necessity from the short-term viewpoint; from the long-term viewpoint discreet preparations for renewing the struggle against the oppressor, possibly with Allied help, and for throwing off the chains of Brest-Litovsk were no less essential.

	The German attitude toward the Bolsheviks was even more complicated. Indeed, like the German attitude toward the “liberated” populations of the Soviet Union in World War II, a quarter of a century later, it was compounded of so many contradictory guiles and greeds that it was finally incoherent. In order to release as many troops as possible for transfer to the western front, and to insure a steady flow of grain and other raw materials, it was imperative to avoid any new exactions that might goad the Soviet government into denouncing the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk; in fact it might be necessary to shore up the Soviets with financial and economic assistance (which the Germans did actually provide during the summer of 1918) to make sure that they were not replaced by a more hostile regime. PLEASE USE LARGER SUMS the German Secretary of State (Foreign Minister) wired Count Mirbach, the Kaiser’s special Ambassador to the Soviet government, in May 1918, AS IT IS GREATLY IN OUR INTEREST THAT THE BOLSHEVIKS SHOULD SURVIVE. At the same time Ludendorff was determined to keep the Bolsheviks weak, so that they would be easy to liquidate after Germany had won the war in the West, and in the meantime he wanted to squeeze every possible drop of blood out of them. Ludendorff’s Soviet policy was a large-scale version of the human-icebox technique by which Papuan cannibals keep their captives alive while progressively slicing off pieces of their flesh. Thus while the large German mission in Moscow—where the government had established itself in March 1918—backed the Soviets against the counterrevolutionary authorities in the south, whom the Allies were supporting, the German forces in Finland and in the Ukraine—and eventually in the Caucasus—helped the local anti-Bolshevik governments to fight the Reds who were loyal to the central government.


Germans ended up funding Bolsheviks during civil war, saw them winning (or "surviving") as "greatly in our interest"

War might be key for making this happen--with the war, Russian Civil War becomes a kind-of proxy war between Central powers and Etente. Without war, the Bolsheviks, unpopular as they were, would have found it harder to find foreign aid. Lenin's hob-nobbing in Vienna, trip through Germany, and pushing for Brest-Litovsk treaty might have helped convince Germans this support was worthwhile. Lenin, Presumably, was of the mind of using the Germans for his own ends.

	...To a much greater degree than is generally realized, 1919 was a kind of dress rehearsal for 1945; there was even an ambitious—and nearly successful—attempt by Lenin to use the bayonets of the Red Army, as Stalin was to do a generation later, for imposing Bolshevism throughout Eastern and Central Europe. In final analysis much of the turmoil in Europe during the era of the peace settlements was simply the Russian civil war moving west.


socialists wanted to make a global push in 1919? sort of thing happened in seattle, and around the world


	...The Whites (using the term to include all organized anti-Bolshevik forces from pale pink socialists or Green peasants to the most unregenerate monarchists) were generally weak in effectives but they were well supplied by the Allies with military equipment and at times were stiffened by foreign combat units. (In the course of the Russian civil war American, British, French, German, Greek, Serbian, Czech, Polish, and Japanese forces intervened more or less aggressively to support the White cause.) In the summer of 1918 the Whites almost succeeded in overthrowing the Reds, and would probably have done so if the Germans had not put substantial support behind the tottering Bolshevik dictatorship.


German support decisive?


	In each of the next two years, the White armies under different leaders and in conjunction with various foreign intervention forces, again came dramatically close to final victory. (Their ultimate failure was due mainly to lack of co-ordination among the anti-Bolshevik factions in Russia, and to lack of agreement among the Allies as to when, where, and how far to back them.)

Whites divided, Allied backing half-hearted

------

	They were indeed unreal years, and though they were wild enough, they were seldom as gay as those of us who are now middle-aged like to recall them. Underneath the hectic sensation-seeking was a spiritual and emotional numbness. In the horror of war, in the shock of revolution, in the disillusionment of peace, Europeans had lost the naive faith in progress which had sustained their fathers and their grandfathers. Technical progress would no doubt continue but the belief that it would contribute to man’s betterment was shattered beyond repair. The brightening morning of the air age—aviation had naturally made giant strides thanks to the war—did not lift men’s hearts, at least in Europe, nor did the dawn of the radio age. (The first U.S. broadcasting station opened in East Pittsburgh in 1920.) “How strange it is,” said G. K. Chesterton, “that mankind should have invented a machine for speaking to the whole world at precisely the moment when no man has anything to say.”
