https://archive.org/stream/in.ernet.dli.2015.183514/2015.183514.The-Origin-Of-The-War-Of-1914-Vol-11_djvu.txt

	...former Foreign Minister, and Ambassador at Vienna at the moment of the crime; Slobodan Jovanovic, Professor of Law and Rector of the University of Belgrade, who was in touch with Dimitricvic and, during the hostilities between Austria and Serbia in 1914, was chief of the press section of the Serbian General Staff; Dr. Leo Pfeffer, the judge charged with the preliminary investigations into the outrage; the barrister Zistier, the boldest counsel for the defence at the Sarajevo trial; General Victor A. Artamonov, the Russian Military Attache at Belgrade; and the mysterious Dr. Kazimirovic whose name r fime up at the trial in curious circumstances. 

	Still to-day with such an abundance of witnesses and protagonists it is a difficult undertaking to reconstruct the exact lines of the tragedy, because most of them try to hide something or to elude some question or other. There are witnesses who attest something of which they have no knowledge, witnesses who remain dumb or give a false account of what they know, witnesses who add adornments to their statements or are mainly interested in self-justification. None the less by piecing tcr- gether and sifting the information and impressions received, the present writer has come to an opinion on the origins of the conspiracy anil the planning of the outrage which he believes to bo substantially correct.* 

	Let us begin by ascertaining what happened after the outrage and the first results of the preliminary investigation. Together with bombs and revolvers the assassins had brought with them from Belgrade cyanide of potassium so that the one who carried out the deed should commit suicide and thus make sure of not betraying the names of the Other accomplices and above all the origins and instigators of the con- spiracy. Obeying their instructions Cabrinovic and Princip swallowed their doses of poison, but it did not do more than cause slight injury to mouth and stomach. Cabrinovic was dragged out of the waters of the MiljaCka into which he had jumped after throwing the bomb and taken to the police first-aid post, where it was soon realized that he was an old acquaintance who had been banished from Sarajevo for five years for socialist opinions. 

	I This opinion practically coincides with that formed by Bruno Brehm, the author of Apis md &t(i, which is an account in the form of a novel of the historic events from the assassination of the Obrenovid royal pair in 190; to that of the Austrian Heir Apparent, ending with the Salonika trial and the death sentence on Dlmitrievid, the hero of the tale. Brehm, who is the son of an Austrian officer, was badly wounded in the First World War. Afler the war he became an archaeologist, novelist and poet. The American historian Sidney B. Fay, in his preface to the English translation of Apis md Este entitled T 6 ^ Call it Fatrioiism, writes : ‘’WTiile using the form of a novel, or rather of a series of vivid episodes in the lives of these two tragic figures, the author has at the same time shown extraordinary skill in interweaving a large amount of accurate historical material taken directly from the .Sarajevo and Salonika official records.’ This is so, and indeed Brehm has made judicious use of other material in addition to that of the two trials. But one cannot here quote a book of this kind, however excellent, as an authority, and must reconstruct the conspiracy from the documents and evidence available. 

	...In December 1937 in the presence of Colonel C. A. Popovid the present writer submitted the text of this interview to Colonel Simid and he confirmed that it was correct in all particulars except for certain formal details, but he assured the present writer that he had never stated that Hartwig knew everything, and that on this point his ideas had been wrongly reported. His opinion was that Hartwig was kept in the dark about the plot but that Artamonov — ^who sympathized with the ^lack Ha/id, to which he had contributed 8,000 francs, and above all with its Dimitrievid, with whom he was in daily co-operation — ^was fuUy informed of everything. Simid added that he had no idea whom Artamonov could have consulted in St. Petersburg before giving Dimitrievid his reply, but it must have been somebody of more auth- ority than himself, possibly the Russian General Staff, possibly the War Minister Sukhomlinov, possibly some Grand Duke, certainly not Hartwig, because in that case there would not have been a delay of several days before he could give his answer. 

	The present writer does not know for what reason Simid altered his original version seeing that he had not troubled to rectify inaccuracies in his interview with Victor Serge as published in ClartS^ if inaccuracies there were. It must, however, be added that Giesl, the Austrian Minister at Belgrade, when questioned by the present writer, also replied that he did not believe Hartwig was cognizant of the plot. Knowing the military weakness of Serbia he was opposed to war between Austria and Serbia and to anything that might cause it. Giesl thought, however, that Artamonov may well have been privy to the plot. 

	Artamonov himself, who meanwhile had risen to be a general and in 1937 was living in Belgrade, assured the present writer in answer to an inquiry that from 19 June to 28 July 1914 he was not in Serbia, being on two months’ leave and his place being taken by Staff Captain Alex- ander Werchovski, an extremely able officer recently posted to Bel- grade. Artamonov was at Zuridi when on 29 June he learnt of the outrage. He did not return fo his post, but went first to Milan and then to Lovrana. There on 24 July he heard the news of the Austrian ultimatum to Serbia. He rushed to Fiume to telephone to Werchovski who, regarding war as inevitable, had already left for St. Petersburg. Then Artamonov decided to return to Belgrade arriving on 28 July the day of Austria’s declaration of war on Serbia. To Artamonov the present writer submitted Simid’s statements. 

	He declared them to be false and that Dimitrievid never mentioned the outrage to him. Only after the war did he learn that Apis was impli- cated. They had been on the friendliest terms but had never discussed the impending Austro-Hungarian manoeuvres in Bosnia-PIerzegovina or Francis Ferdinand’s visit to Bosnia. They had never exchanged ideas on what might happen if the Heir Apparent were to die. On the present writer’s remarldng that it was strange he should absent himself from Belgrade at the very moment when the Austrian manoeuvres were on the point of beginning on the Bosnian frontier and the Archduke was expected at Sarajevo, Artamonov, after some embarrassed hesitation, said that he had not had any furlough for three years and permission had been given him in the first half of June when he had no idea of what was about to happen. He reiterated that he Icnew nothing of the outrage, and that in the little Belgrade of the time, where public life was confined to a very few cafes, the plot could not have been kept secret, and he added: 

	If Austria did not take adequate precautions for the protection of the Archduke’s life, there must have been reasons for it. Perhaps the Sarajevo drama implies a mysterious Hapsburg drama. Probably this is the ex- planation why Jovan Jovanovid’s approach to Bilinski had no result.^ 

	'W'hen the present writer asked Artamonov for his explanation of the statements made by Dimitrievic to Colonel Simid, his reply was : 

	Perhaps Dragutin Dimitrievid gave this version to attenuate and cover up his own guilt or to boast of influences from high quarters. He was a strong, ambitious man who aimed at gaining complete and unconditional command of the State. His statements to Colonel Simid as to my having agreed to the Sarajevo outrage on one hand whitewashed him for his part in the plot and on the other enhanced his prestige. 

	The present writer must honestly say he remained unconvinced by the behaviour of this officer, who struck him as being of limited intel- ligence with little strength of character, or by his explanations for his absence from Belgrade even after the outrage. He showed the present writer his note book of June-July 1914, a bald list of Swiss and Italian hotels, giving the room-numbers of the accommodation occupied by himself and his family in each hotel and the account of the day’s ex- penses and nothing else. No mention of the Sarajevo outrage or Hart- wig’s death. Only the top of the page bearing the date 24 July 1914, under the name of his hotel at Lovrana are the words : Austrian ulti- matum to Serbia, followed by the usual record of the day’s expenditure beginning with: coffee — 2 lire I 