






------




http://www.azcentral.com/story/news/local/arizona-investigations/2016/11/20/mysterious-saga-arizona-arms-dealer/94023174/
	According to a pre-sentence report, Chapman described the theft as an impulsive mistake. He still wanted to study Russian “and be of service to his country.” A probation officer opined that the defendant had “struggled for parental approval all his life, and rebelled when he did not get it.” A detective said Chapman had been influenced by pals — “a crowd of idiots.”


servvice to which country?

	...Then he mentioned the appraisal business and asked to regain the right to bear arms so he could pursue “certain types of security clearances within the government.” The judge accommodated.


Maricopa County's finest judges

	...It is unclear when the first big deal went down. But by 2010, Turi Defense Group had hit pay dirt, supplying $14 million in arms to the National Directorate of Security, Afghanistan’s CIA-supported intelligence agency. According to Buzzfeed, the equipment out of Bulgaria included machine guns, sniper rifles and rocket-propelled grenades with launchers. Turi worked with a subcontractor, Arlo Dolarian, who at the time was under federal investigation for possible arms-dealing violations.


get people to hate each other and give them guns, sounds familiar. But this time did they drag the Obama Administration into it?

	By that time, Turi had associates working in Qatar, Cypress, Dubai, London, Bulgaria and Arizona. According to a grand jury indictment, Turi warned one of his comrades via email: “State Department pulled plug on us. Be careful!!!! ... It’s out of our hands until foreign policy changes to support ground forces.”

	Days later, Turi came up with a Plan B: Seek a permit for the arms deal, but don’t show Libya as the ultimate destination. He submitted a new State Department application with an identical weapons list, this time listing Qatar as the recipient.

	Federal prosecutors would later seize Turi’s emails, which spelled out the details. A bank in the United Arab Emirates was to provide financing for shipments to Qatar. And the transaction hinged on Libyan rebels agreeing to “a guarantee of oil reserves.”

	As Turi noted in an encrypted email to associates, “(O)nce the equipment leaves Eastern Europe, it is now in Arab hands.



	...Turi negotiated with the manufacturer while Stevens headed for Libya as the U.S. envoy.

	According to congressional records, Stevens’ military support was canceled because the U.S. had declared a policy of “no boots on the ground.” Stevens and his entourage arrived in Benghazi on April 5, 2011, aboard a Greek ship, the Aegean Pearl.

	His assignment was to quietly develop a relationship with resistance forces.

	One week before Stevens was sworn in as ambassador to Libya, court records show, Turi exchanged emails with him, seeking help with his State Department permit. Stevens thanked Turi for the information, adding, “I’ll keep it in mind and share it with my colleagues in Washington.”

	Clinton, meanwhile, was still weighing U.S. support for the insurgents. According to Politico, she messaged one of her State Department colleagues that month: “FYI, the idea of using private security experts to arm the opposition should be considered.”

	Turi's guns-to-Qatar application was approved.

	All systems appeared to be go.

	And, as Turi informed associates, the price tag was now set at $276 million “because the U.S. Dept of State denied Libya.”

	...In December 2012, based on unnamed sources, the New York Times reported that Obama’s administration “secretly gave its blessing to arms shipments to Libyan rebels from Qatar. But American officials later grew alarmed as evidence grew that Qatar was turning some of the weapons over to Islamic militants.”

	...On Feb. 11, 2014, a federal grand jury in Phoenix finally handed up the four-count indictment. Turi was accused of lying to the State Department and violating U.S. arms-export laws. Their case theory: Turi's deal with Qatar ultimately was intended to get around the Libyan embargo.

	...In the end, prosecutors dropped their five-year, multimillion-dollar case just weeks before the Nov. 8 vote.

	The reason, Turi said: “It would have disclosed a covert weapons operation ... in a presidential election.”

	Justice Department officials and John Leonardo, U.S. attorney for Arizona, declined to answer questions about the case, including whether prosecution was aborted for political reasons.









------

http://www.washingtontimes.com/news/2016/oct/7/hillary-clinton-obama-benghazi-jihad-and-cover/
	It’s all becoming clear now. If you look back at the actions of the Obama administration, especially Hillary Clinton, and connect the dots, it starts to make sense. The question is, will it be too late to save the Republic?

	In a very insightful article by General Mike Flynn titled “Why Hillary’s record on Libya is even worse than you think,” he lays out the case that Hillary, as Secretary of State, knowingly funded jihadis in Libya after meeting with Gulf kingdoms and tens of millions of dollars flowed into the Clinton Foundation. That is what the Benghazi cover-up was all about, to prevent this information from becoming known.

	...The report provides testimony that State Department officials knew that the protests had been overly emphasized in administration messaging but the responsibility for the talking points was placed with the CIA.


funny


they let her off with the report but damaged her politically


http://www.politico.com/blogs/benghazi-report-findings-2016/2016/06/benghazi-report-ciritical-addendum-224871


Jordon-Popmeo report actually goes into accusations of wrongdoing



------








------


