http://www.heritage.org/europe/commentary/russia-skepticism
	From Russia with Skepticism

	Bruce Klingner


	...Nor does North Korea always engage in purely binary behavior of only belligerence or engagement. Instead, the regime often displays a simultaneous, schizophrenic implementation of both tactics to unnerve and undermine its opponents. 



claiming north korea is rational, playing 4d chess? sounds familiar...

	...Even reports of a Russian-North Korean deal on a pipeline deal connecting Russia with both Koreas must be treated with doubt. Such a massive undertaking would be economically unfeasible unless it includes South Korea. North Korea’s inability to pay for resources – Kim’s summit meeting also sought to forgive a portion of Pyongyang’s existing debt to Russia – makes such a multi-year, multi-billion dollar venture economically unfeasible. 




http://www.americasradionewsnetwork.com/bruce-klingner-joins-arnn-to-discuss-whether-or-not-north-korea-is-a-real-t.html
	Bruce Klingner is the Senior Research Fellow for Northeast Asia at The Heritage Foundation's Asian Studies Center. Klingner joined Heritage in 2007 after 20 years in the intelligence community working at the CIA and Defense Intelligence Agency.



http://www.msn.com/en-in/entertainment/bollywood/north-korea-nuclear-threat-already-out-of-the-barn-heritage-foundations-bruce-klingner/vp-AApfdFy


seems a little defeatist



http://www.newsweek.com/2017/05/05/what-war-north-korea-looks-588861.html
	In a recent report widely read in the Pentagon and intelligence community, Klingner argued that the talk about pre-emption, and declarations that all options are on the table, needs to stop. “Advocacy of pre-emption both by North Korea and by the U.S. and its allies is destabilizing,” he wrote, and could lead to greater potential for either side to miscalculate. Pyongyang may not realize that the more it demonstrates and threatens to use its nuclear prowess, the more likely allied action becomes during a crisis. “Each side could misinterpret the other’s intentions, thus fueling tension, intensifying a perceived need to escalate, and raising the risk of miscalculation, including pre-emptive attack.



https://www.usatoday.com/story/news/world/2013/03/30/north-korea-military-attack-threat/2036639/


Klinger seems to rule-out pre-emptive attack


http://www.cnn.com/2017/09/19/politics/trump-north-korea-reaction/index.html
	But others, including Bruce Klingner, a senior fellow at the Heritage Foundation, said the Trump administration "has issued conflicting signals as to whether it would consider a preventative military strike on North Korea even without indications of imminent regime attack on the US and its allies."

	Klingner said that previous comments by Trump, Tillerson, and National Security Advisor H.R. McMaster "all suggested the potential for such an attack," while Mattis' comments, "though strong and resolute, were in the context of a US response to a North Korean attack." 

	He notes that Trump's UN comments about North Korea's total destruction "appeared to be in response to a North Korean attack."



http://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/americas/us-politics/donald-trump-kim-jong-un-same-speechwriter-ex-cia-analyst-north-korea-us-tensions-a7883761.html
	On BBC Radio Four's Today programme, former CIA analyst Bruce Klingner said the President's choice of words was not "helpful".

	He said on Wednesday: "It seems to be language written by the same speech writer as that for Kim Jong-un.

	"I don’t think it’s helpful in trying to generate international support for the United States.

	"It, in a sense, generates more concern about US intentions and seems to affirm the growing perception that the US may be considering a preventative attack on North Korea."

	A military strike on North Korea would have "catastrophic consequences", he said, echoing the analysis of Defence Secretary James Mattis.












------

Mao book:

	During his visit to Russia, however, Mao changed. He became
determined to fight America openly-because only such a war would
enable him to gouge out of Stalin what he needed to build his own world-
class war machine. What Mao had in mind boiled down to a deal: Chinese
soldiers would fight the Americans for Stalin in exchange for Soviet tech-
nology and equipment.


	...But for Stalin, the greatest attraction of a war in Korea was that the
Chinese, with their massive numbers, which Mao was eager to use, might
be able to eliminate, and in any case tie down, so many American troops
that the balance of power might tilt in Stalin's favour and enable him to
turn his schemes into reality These schemes included seizing various
European countries, among them Germany, Spain and Italy One scenario
Stalin discussed during the Korean War was an air attack on the U. S. fleet
on the high seas between Japan and Korea (en route to Inchon, in
September 1950). In fact, Stalin told Mao on 5 October 1950 that the
period provided a unique-and short-lived-window of opportunity
because two of the major capitalist states, Germany and Japan, were out of
action militarily Discussing the possibility of what amounted to a Third
World War} Stalin said: "Should we fear this? In my opinion, we should
not. . . If a war is inevitable, then let it be waged no and not in a few
, .
"t
years t1me. . .




	Poverty-stricken, exhausted China was about to be thrown into war
with the U.S.A. It seems it was only no at the beginning of October, that
Mao convened the regime's top bod the Politburo, to discuss this
momentous issue. The Politburo was not a team to make important deci-
sions, but to serve as a sounding-board for Mao. On this occasion, he spe-
cifically invited differing views, because of the colossal implications of war
with America. Nearly all his colleagues were strongly against going into
Korea, including his No.2 Liu Shao-ch'i and nominal military chief Zhu
De. Lin Biao was the most vocal opponent. Chou En-lai took a cautious
and equivocal position. Mao said later that going into Korea was "decided
by one man and a half": himself the "one" and Chou the "half" Among the
huge problems voiced were: that the U.S. had complete air suprema and
artillery superiority of about 40:1; that if China got involved, America
might bomb China's big cities and destroy its industrial base; and that
America might drop atomic bombs on China.

	Mao himself had been losing sleep over these questions. He needed a
functioning China as the base for his wider ambitions. But Mao gambled
that America would not expand the war to China. Chinese cities and
industrial bases could be protected from U. S. bombing by the Russian air
force. And as for atomic bombs, his gut feeling was that America would be
deterred by international public opinion, particularly as Truman had
already dropped two-both on an Asian country: Mao took precautions
for himself though. During the Korean War, he mostly holed up in a top-
secret military estate outside Peking in the Jade Spring Hills, well
equipped with air-raid shelters.


	...A T THE SAM E TIM E, Mao prepared the ground for going into Korea by
pretending to give America "fair warning." For this purpose, Chou En-lai
staged an elaborate charade, waking the Indian ambassador in the small
hours of 3 October to tell him "we will intervene" if American troops
crossed the 38th Parallel. Choosing this roundabout channel, using an
ambassador whose credit in the West was minimal, when it would have
been perfectly simple to make an official statement, suggests compellingly
that Mao wanted his "warning" to be ignored: thus he could go into Korea
claiming he was acting out of self-defence.


"Mao wanted"... or Chou En-Lai?

...he wired Kim
that "we have decided to dispatch the Volunteers into Korea to help you."
He also sent Chou En-lai and Lin Biao to see Stalin about arms supplies.
En route, Lin sent Mao a long cable urging him to abandon the idea of
going in. The reason Mao sent Lin Biao to see Stalin when Lin was such a
strong opponent of intervention was to impress on Stalin the military
difficulties facing the Chinese and thus extract the maximum out of the
Master.
Chou and Lin got to Stalin's villa on the Black Sea on the 10th, and
talked through the night until 5 in the morning. Stalin promised them
"planes, artillery; tanks and other equipment." Chou did not even negoti-
ate a price. But out of the blue Stalin reneged about the key requirement:
air cover for Chinese troops. Stalin had promised this C"a division of jet
fighter planes- 124 pieces for covering [Chinese] troops") on 13 July Now
he claimed that the planes would not be ready for another two months.
Without air cover, Chinese troops would be sitting ducks. Chou and Lin
Biao argued that Russian air cover was essential. An impasse was reached.
Stalin then wired Mao to tell him that China did not have to join the war.
Stalin was calling Mao's bluff by saying, as Mao put it later, "Forget it!"
Mao climbed down at once. "With or without air cover from the Soviet
Union," he told Stalin, "we go in." Mao needed the war. He wired Chou on
13 October: "We should enter the war. We must enter the war. . ." When
Chou received the cable he buried his head in his hands. That same day
Mao told the Russian ambassador that China was going in, only express-
ing the "hope" that Russian air cover would arrive "as soon as possible, but
not later than in two months," which was, in fact, Stalin's own timetable.



http://www3.nccu.edu.tw/~lorenzo/Hao%20Chinas%20Decision.pdf
	Thirty-seven years have passed since the Korean War ended in July 1953. The Korean War, which was one ofthe most dramatic events of the cold war, resulted not only in huge casualties on the two sides, but also in a deep wound in Sino-American relations which took more than two decades to heal. Vast amounts of research have been done on the war, but one important aspect - the motivation behind the decision of the People's Republic of China to enter the war- remains mysteriously masked, or at least unconvincingly explained. 


no kidding


------


http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/worldnews/europe/russia/12128743/How-and-why-Soviet-agents-spied-on-Chairman-Maos-poo.html
	How - and why - Soviet agents spied on Chairman Mao's poo

	It was a top secret Soviet experiment that was definitely not to be sniffed at. 

	When Mao Zedong visited Joseph Stalin's Russia in the winter of 1949, Soviet spies were reportedly not only monitoring the whereabouts of the Chinese leader - but also the movements of his bowels. 

	...Which begs the question: what exactly were the Soviet scientists hoping to glean from Mao and other foreign leaders' poo?

	"For example, if they detected high levels of amino acid Tryptophan, they concluded that person was calm and approachable," Mr Atamanenko told the BBC.

	"But a lack of potassium in poo was seen as a sign of a nervous disposition and someone with insomnia." 


huh



------


world was going our way:


Collaboration between Soviet intelligence and the
Chinese Communist Party (CCP) went back to the 1920s.
A police raid on the Soviet consulate at Beijing in 1927
uncovered a mass of documents on Soviet espionage in
China, the involvement of the CCP and instructions to it
from Moscow ‘not to shrink from any measures, even
including looting and massacres’ when promoting clashes
between Westerners and the local population. The arrest
in 1931 of the Comintern representative in Shanghai,
Jakov Rudnik (alias ‘Hilaire Noulens’), led to the capture
of many more files on Soviet intelligence operations and
the Communist underground. A British intelligence report
concluded that the files ‘afforded a unique opportunity of
seeing from the inside, and on unimpeachable
documentary evidence, the working of a highly developed
Communist organization of the illegal order’. Among the
documents which attracted particular attention were a
large number of letters from ‘the notorious Annamite
Communist, Nguyen Ai Quac’, later better known as Ho
Chi-Minh. But the ‘most outstanding’ document, in the
view of British intelligence, was a CCP report on the
killing of members of the family of an alleged Communist
traitor, Ku Shun-chang, carried out under the direction of
Mao Zedong’s future Prime Minister, Zhou Enlai. In 1933 Mao’s security chief, Kang Sheng, arrived in Moscow as deputy head of the Chinese delegation to the Comintern and spent the next four years learning from the example of the NKVD during its most paranoid phase.


...To his subordinates he
became the ‘Venerable Kang’; to others he was ‘China’s
Beria’. Though a connoisseur of traditional Chinese art
and a skilful, ambidextrous calligrapher, Kang surpassed
even Beria in personal depravity, taking sadistic pleasure
in supervising the torture of supposed counter-
revolutionaries. 3 As well as helping Mao polish his poetry
and prose, Kang also contributed to his personal
collection of erotica.

Enlai and Kang sound like KGB recruits?


...Nikolai Leonov later claimed that during the 1930s and
1940s Soviet intelligence had built up ‘a very extensive
and well-formed information network on Chinese soil’.


...Mao never admitted that the Cultural
Revolution had been a disastrous mistake. ‘But’,
according to Li, ‘Lin Biao’s perfidy convinced him that
he needed to change his strategy. He put Zhou Enlai in
charge of rehabilitating many of the leaders who had been
overthrown.’


hmmm


------

https://books.google.com/books?id=idnZAAAAQBAJ&pg=PA159&lpg=PA159&dq=%22Lin+Biao%22+OR+%22Lin+Piao%22+soviet+agent&source=bl&ots=KakJiHbi1f&sig=vhRWe6PVq5hat-hL4dc1voEcZV0&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwiTmZ6i2cbWAhUL7yYKHUX-DqE4ChDoAQhRMAk#v=onepage&q=Russian%20spy&f=false

Mao concerned with Russian spies in entourage



------


https://www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/chinas-secrecy-about-its-past-could-stifle-its-future/2011/12/21/gIQAd9FORP_story.html?utm_term=.14d084a71e88
	By Sergey Radchenko

	...Consider the case of Lin Biao, a hero of the Chinese Civil War, and later Mao Zedong’s comrade in arms during the Cultural Revolution, who died in 1971. Lin, who is well remembered for his appearances atop Tiananmen Square, the Little Red Book in his hand, supposedly conspired to kill the Chinese leader, even though he was Mao’s anointed successor. When the plot was discovered, he fled to the Soviet Union, then China’s archenemy, but he never made it: His plane crashed in Mongolia after allegedly running out of fuel.

	This is the official story; this is as much as the Chinese government is willing to say 40 years on. We do not know whether Lin Biao really planned to kill Mao. Their fallout could have been a personal feud or, as the chairman later claimed, a policy disagreement (Lin Biao is said to have opposed the Sino-American opening).



------


http://articles.latimes.com/2004/feb/22/books/bk-khrush22/
	A tangled conspiracy tale, Soviet style

	..."Stalin's Last Crime" makes such an effort to unmask him. But what distinguishes it from the rest is the way in which the authors combine crime-story narrative techniques with unprecedented, previously unknown documents from recently opened KGB archives to produce their account. Their book suggests that Stalin had a plan for worldwide chaos, starting by fabricating a Jewish conspiracy and ending in nuclear war. Even more startling, the authors suggest that this plan was foiled by one of Stalin's own men, who killed the leader.

	...Jonathan Brent, editorial director of Yale University Press, and Russian historian Vladimir P. Naumov seek to untangle what happened to Stalin's "final masterpiece of deception," the Jewish Doctors' Plot of 1953. Threatening to create purges across Soviet society to rival those in the 1930s, the plot alleged that a conspiracy existed among Jewish doctors to kill high-ranking KGB officers.

	...The Jewish Antifascist Committee and its president, the famous Soviet Jewish actor Solomon Mikhoels, was also named part of the conspiracy, and there was a rumored plot to destroy the Kremlin called "The Plan of the Internal Blow." That plan revolved around the case of I.I. Varfolomeev, an alleged "spy who had worked for the Japanese prior to the Great Patriotic War [World War II] and for the Americans beginning in 1948."

	Five nuclear devices were to be fired from the windows of the U.S. Embassy (then on Red Square) at the Kremlin: The whole Soviet central government "would go up in smoke, as would most of Moscow." Here, Stalin's paranoia moves from the world of Beckett to Eugene Ionesco and to the theater of the absurd.

	The book pays great attention to details, explaining through documents and analysis that "Timashuk's letter had nothing to do with inaugurating the plot. It had everything to do, after the fact, with helping to establish the existence of the conspiratorial group," because "underlying Stalin's strategy was the deeply rooted principle, inherited from Lenin, that enemies were more useful to Soviet power than friends."

	"Stalin," the authors add, "wasn't simply paranoid. He didn't see enemies everywhere -- he invented them because he needed them."


https://archive.org/details/TheSwordAndTheShield-TheMitrokhinArchiveAndTheSecretHistoryOfTheKGB
	As in other NATO countries, the chief priority of intelligence collection in the FRG during the early 1980s was operation RYAN—the fruitless attempt to discover ... Western preparations for a nuclear first strike against the Soviet Union.

	...For several years Moscow succumbed to what its ambassador in Washington, Anatoli Dobrynin, fairly described as a “paranoid interpretation” of Reagan’s policy. Most residencies in Western capitals were less alarmist than Andropov and the KGB leadership. When Oleg Antonovich Gordievsky joined the London residency in June 1982 he found all his colleagues in Line PR skeptical about operation RYAN. None, however, were willing to risk their careers by challenging the Centre’s assessment. RYAN thus created a vicious circle of intelligence collection and assessment. Residencies were, in effect, ordered to search out alarming information. The Centre was duly alarmed by what they supplied and demanded more. The Washington resident, Stanislav Andreyevich Androsov, a protégé of Kryuchkov, was at pains to provide it. 

	The Centre interpreted the announcement of the SDI (“Star Wars”) program in March 1983 as part of the psychological preparation of the American people for nuclear war. On September 28, 1983 the terminally ill Andropov issued from his sickbed a denunciation of American policy couched in apocalyptic language unparalleled since the depths of the Cold War. “Outrageous military psychosis” had taken over the United States. “The Reagan administration, in its imperial ambitions, goes so far that one begins to doubt whether Washington has any brakes at all preventing it from crossing the point at which any sober-minded person must stop.” Alarm within the Centre reached a climax during the NATO exercise “Able Archer 83,” held in November 1983 to practice nuclear release procedures. For a time the KGB leadership was haunted by the fear that the exercise might be intended as cover for a nuclear first strike. Some FCD officers stationed in the West were by now more concerned by the alarmism in the Centre than by the threat of a Western surprise attack.

	Operation RYAN wound down (though it did not end) during 1984, helped by the death of its two main proponents, Andropov and defense minister Ustinov, and by reassuring signals from London and Washington, both worried by intelligence on Soviet paranoia.

	...The old suspicions and conspiracy theories about the United States, however, still lurked not far below the surface of Kryuchkov’s address. Without mentioning operation RYAN by name, he sought to justify the principles on which it was based:

		Many of [the FCD’s] former responsibilities have not been removed from the agenda. The principal one of these is not to overlook the immediate danger of nuclear conflict being unleashed.

	And he added a warning about what he alleged was the continuing brutality of “provocation operations” by Western intelligence services; he claimed that there had been over 900 such operations during the first half of 1988 alone. 


http://articles.latimes.com/2004/feb/22/books/bk-khrush22/
	A tangled conspiracy tale, Soviet style

	..."It was not by accident that the medical and the political sides of the plot were expanding in the same way toward greater and greater inclusiveness," the authors assert. "The plotters were potentially all Jews, and all Jews were potential enemies of the state."


https://archive.org/details/TheWorldWasGoingOurWayTheKGBAndTheBattleForTheTheThirdWorld
	...With its habitual tendency to conspiracy theory, never more marked than in its attitude to Zionism and the Jewish lobby in the United States, the Centre interpreted Sadat’s visit less as a piece of theatre than as a deep-laid plot. Sadat, it believed, had arranged the trip with the Americans...

	...Remarkably, Avni’s enthusiasm for the Soviet Union survived even the paranoia of the ‘Jewish doctors’ plot’. He later told his interrogator that Stalin had been a ‘genius’ and initially refused to believe that Khrushchev’s ‘Secret Speech’ of 1956 denouncing Stalin was genuine.

	While in Brussels, Avni also began to be employed by Mossad, using his fluent German to pose as a German businessman and make contact with former Nazis.

	...The KGB sent a stream of reports, often signed personally by Andropov, to the Politburo and the Central Committee, reporting the resolute action taken to ‘neutralize’ even the most minor protests. Every protest was interpreted as part of an international Zionist conspiracy against the Soviet Union:

		...Zionist circles, in trying to deflect the attention of world public opinion away from the aggressive actions of the US in Indochina and of Israel in the Middle East, and toward the non-existent ‘problem’ of the Jews in the USSR, have unleashed on our country a broad campaign of slander, and to this end are organizing abroad anti- Soviet meetings, assemblies, conferences, marches and other hostile acts.

		. . . Along with the cultivation of anti-Soviet world opinion, the Zionists are striving to exert ideological influence on the Jewish population of the Soviet Union, in order to provoke negative manifestations and create a nationalist underground in our country.

 	...Andropov continued to take a close, even obsessive, personal interest in the surveillance of would-be Jewish emigrants and all contacts between Soviet Jews and their foreign supporters. He regarded even the sending of matsos (unleavened bread) from the West to Soviet Jews for the seder (the Passover meal) as an issue of such grave importance that it needed to be brought to the attention of the Politburo, writing in March 1975:

		From the experience of previous years, it is clear that the delivery of such parcels [of matsos] to the addressees gives rise to negative processes among the Jewish population of the USSR, and reinforces nationalist and pro-emigration feelings.

		In view of this, and in view of the fact that at the present time Jewish communities are fully supplied with locally baked matsos, the Committee of State Security considers it essential for parcels containing matsos sent from abroad to be confiscated . .

	The claim that Soviet Jews were already well supplied with Passover matsos was disinformation designed to pre-empt opposition to Andropov’s proposal from those Politburo members who, like Brezhnev, occasionally grasped that the obsession with Zionist conspiracy was ‘making us stupid’.

 	...the level of anti-Zionist and anti-semitic paranoia in the Centre dropped sharply after Stalin’s death in March 1953


http://articles.latimes.com/2004/feb/22/books/bk-khrush22/
	A tangled conspiracy tale, Soviet style

	...They explain that "by providing the plot with Jewish characters, Stalin could broaden the conspiracy ... to the international scene in which America and the newly formed state of Israel posed significant, if still potential, threats to Soviet power and prestige. The Jews would become the 'canal' through which American subversion flowed directly into the Soviet government, threatening to destroy it. The new menace would have both an external and an internal component."

	..."The Plan of the Internal Blow" along with the "Jewish conspiracy" of which the vozhd himself would become a target was to justify a Soviet holocaust and the possible "hot war" between the Soviet Union and the United States. This particular hypothesis, offered by Brent and Naumov, lacks consistent documented proof; however, it appears convincing and even credible precisely because...


https://apnews.com/9f77a17c001f4cf3baeb28990b0d92eb/ap-investigation-nuclear-smugglers-sought-terrorist-buyers
	AP INVESTIGATION: Nuclear black market seeks IS extremists

	...CHISINAU, Moldova (AP) — Over the pulsating beat at an exclusive nightclub, the arms smuggler made his pitch to a client: 2.5 million euros for enough radioactive cesium to contaminate several city blocks.

	It was earlier this year, and the two men were plotting their deal at an unlikely spot: the terrace of Cocos Prive, a dance club and sushi bar in Chisinau, the capital of Moldova.

	“You can make a dirty bomb, which would be perfect for the Islamic State,” the smuggler said. “If you have a connection with them, the business will go smoothly.”

	...The previously unpublicized case is one of at least four attempts in five years in which criminal networks with suspected Russian ties sought to sell radioactive material to extremists through Moldova, an investigation by The Associated Press has found. One investigation uncovered an attempt to sell bomb-grade uranium to a real buyer from the Middle East, the first known case of its kind.

	In that operation, wiretaps and interviews with investigators show, a middleman for the gang repeatedly ranted with hatred for America as he focused on smuggling the essential material for an atomic bomb and blueprints for a dirty bomb to a Middle Eastern buyer.

	...The sting operations involved a partnership between the FBI and a small group of Moldovan investigators, who over five years went from near total ignorance of the black market to wrapping up four sting operations. Informants and police posing as connected gangsters penetrated the smuggling networks, using old-fashioned undercover tactics as well as high-tech gear from radiation detectors to clothing threaded with recording devices.

	But their successes were undercut by striking shortcomings: Kingpins got away, and those arrested evaded long prison sentences, sometimes quickly returning to nuclear smuggling, AP found.

	...Several months later, a former KGB informant, Teodor Chetrus, called Malic’s source, the Moldovan businessman. Chetrus told him he had uranium to sell, but was looking for a Middle Eastern buyer.

	Unlike Malic’s first case, this one involved highly enriched uranium, the type that can be used to make a nuclear bomb.


https://archive.org/details/TheSwordAndTheShield-TheMitrokhinArchiveAndTheSecretHistoryOfTheKGB
	...In 1983, at the height of operation RYAN (the combined KGB/GRU attempt to find (nonexistent) evidence of US and NATO plans for a surprise nuclear attack), Andropov ordered preparations by Department 8 for terrorist attacks on British, American and NATO targets in Europe. Plans were made for a campaign of letter bombs to be sent to Mrs. Thatcher’s office at 10 Downing Street and to a series of prominent US and NATO representatives. At about the same time the KGB organized a series of dead drops in bars and restaurants near American bases in West Germany, intended to conceal explosives which could be detonated in a manner that would give the impression of terrorist attacks. The dead drop sites included behind a vending machine, in a ventilation cavity under a sink, on a wooden beam over a lavatory and underneath a paper-towel dispenser. By the time the sites were discovered by the CIA in 1985, however, operation RYAN was winding down and plans for a KGB terrorist campaign against NATO targets had been shelved.

	In August 1983, while RYAN was still in full swing, the Centre instructed the main residencies in European NATO countries to step up their search for NATO preparations for

		the secret infiltration of sabotage teams with nuclear, bacteriological and chemical weapons into the countries of the Warsaw Pact; [and] the expansion of the network of sabotage-training intelligence schools and increase in the recruitment of émigrés from the socialist countries and persons who know the language of these countries, and the creation of émigré military formations and sabotage and intelligence teams.

	Though, as with most of the requirements for operation RYAN, there was no such intelligence to collect, the Centre’s instructions give an important insight into Moscow’s contingency plans for the role of Department 8 and its DRGs in an attack on NATO.



------



journal-dl.com/downloadpdf/591088493fbb6e13743fe44b
	Mao's China and the Sino-Soviet Split

	Mingjiang Li

	...Mao’s accusation that Peng was a Soviet agent, while completely untrue...

	...The Cultural Revolution radicals not only framed the Soviet Union as negatively as possible, but also tried to fabricate and exaggerate their opponents’ foreign policy errors. Almost all the CCP leaders who were purged during the Cultural Revolution were accused of some sort of connection to the “heinous” Soviet enemy.

	...Many other opponents of Mao, including Liu Shaoqi and Deng Xiaoping, were treated in the same manner. Even though they served as the vanguard of Mao’s crusade against Moscow in the early 1960s, they were inevitably accused of betraying Mao and colluding with Khrushchev revisionists by carrying out a “revisionist” and “counter-revolutionary” foreign policy line.

	...Obviously, the accusations had been made up by the radicals.

	...As shown in previous chapters, Liu and other moderate leaders did have slightly different views from Mao about China’s Soviet policy at several critical junctures

	...at various critical junctures, Liu and others attempted to mitigate the radicalism in Mao’s Soviet policy and to save the Sino-Soviet alliance from complete rupture. Obviously, traces of their policy preference did not escape the attention of Mao and his radical supporters.

	...But in almost all cases, their views were intended only as suggestions for Mao.

	...But their service to Mao in fighting against Moscow created a political atmosphere in China that would regard only toughness against the Soviets as politically correct.

	...In fact, he intentionally made antagonism towards the Soviets part of the strategy for defeating his domestic political challengers.

	...In a talk with a Burmese leader in August 1971, Zhou Enlai recalled that China’s relations with Burma were influenced by the ultra- leftist trend:

		[I]n the development of the Cultural Revolution, if it only concerns radicalization among the youth, [their actions] could have been [prevented by] persuasion and corrected. But the problem was that some bad people took advantage of the opportunity to manipulate mass movements, to split mass movements, and to destroy [Sino- Burmese] foreign relations.”

	...The radical Maoist strategy of using the Soviet Union as an external scape- goat proved to be effective not only in terms of wiping out domestic rivals, but also in leaving a deep memory of the Soviet adversary among the Chinese people for years afterward.

	...It is my hope that scholars and analysts may find this approach useful in understanding many complicated issues in today’s world, where differences among civilizations are playing a far more important role than traditional security concerns, and terrorism, very often fueled by religious and ideological extremism, has become a grave threat to individual lives and the national security of many countries.



https://issforum.org/roundtables/PDF/Roundtable-XIII-14.pdf

same guy on h-diplo



http://freebeacon.com/national-security/china-suspected-hack-tiananmen-anniversary/
	The sophisticated cyber attack against the website of the Victims of Communism Memorial Foundation took place Thursday and Friday as the group released a video on the massacre and then attempted to hold an online conference involving Tiananmen survivors and other human rights activists, said the foundation’s president, Marion Smith.

	Smith believes the Chinese government was behind the cyber attack.


seems like the kindof thing Russia would do? but no info on that


http://freebeacon.com/national-security/china-continuing-cyber-attacks-on-u-s-networks/


more to this story?


http://freebeacon.com/national-security/asia-times-blurred-lines-chinas-competition-with-u-s-resembles-low-level-warfare/
	Asia Times: Blurred Lines—China’s Competition With U.S. Resembles Low-Level Warfare

	BY: Bill Gertz

	The era of U.S. government policies designed to play down or dismiss growing strategic challenges from China seems to be ending.

	For the first time in years, the nation's most senior intelligence official revealed that China now poses a regional security threat engaged in hostile activities that blur the line between war and peace.

	James Clapper, the director of national intelligence, testified before the U.S. Senate that the threat from Beijing is not limited to the large-scale buildup of both strategic nuclear and conventional forces. It includes new forms of competition involving information operations, cyber attacks, intelligence activities, and other non-kinetic forms of warfare.













http://www.snopes.com/russia-hack-gps-uss-john-mccain/


http://www.snopes.com/do-sonic-weapons-explain-the-health-diplomats-cuba/

Kasparak denies Russian involved in things?


http://www.snopes.com/2017/08/17/is-the-alt-left-a-real-thing/

http://tapnewswire.com/2017/02/do-you-trust-snopes-you-wont-after-reading-this/

familiar


------











------










https://kc-johnson.com/spring-2010-classes/us-and-cold-war-foreign-policy/


bullet points including on why Mao might have decided to enter Korean war


https://www.cia.gov/library/readingroom/docs/esau-05.pdf

Liu in favor of the DIY steel plants?


------


https://webcache.googleusercontent.com/search?q=cache:VW1Mvm_qhxcJ:https://www.cia.gov/library/readingroom/docs/CIA-RDP85T00875R001000010028-6.pdf+&cd=49&hl=en&ct=clnk&gl=us

Developments in the three year period following
the Lushan plenum (1959-1962) demonstrated that in im-
portant respects, in the great debate over domestic and
foreign policy staged at this historic meeting, Peng Te-
huai had been right and Mao Tse-tung had been wrong. The
combined effect of irrational economic policy, successive
bad harvests and the Soviet withdrawal of technicians in
the summer of 1960 dealt Mao's "great leap forward" program
of economic development a shattering blow. As a result,
by the winter of 1961–1962 opposition to Mao's policies
and programs extended into the ranks of the Politburo to
include a number of those who were charged with the
responsibility for coping with this domestic crisis. As
Mao Tse-tung would subsequently point out, this opposi-
tion was of two kinds—-that carried on "secretly" by "the
Peng Chen group" and that carried on "openly"" by "the
Liu Shao-chi - Teng Hsiao-ping group." The progressive
awareness by Mao (and a small coterie of trusted advisers)
of the extent of this opposition would culminate in the
fall of 1965 in the decision to initiate what would prove
to be the most thoroughgoing and one of the most violent
party purges in Communist history.
It appears to be true, as Red Guard publications
have charged, that Liu Shao-chi at an enlarged Central
Committee work conference in January 1962 not only defended
Mao's earlier critics but repeated some of the same critic-
isms of Mao's radical domestic programs which Peng Te-huai
had first raised at Lushan. Although he could cite the
party constitution as justifying his "open opposition" on
this occasion, Liu must have suspected that Mao would treat
this criticism as a direct personal attack. It appears
in retrospect that Mao Tse-tung did in fact interpret


Liu's criticism at the January 1962 party work conference
as a direct attack against both his policies and himself
and determined not long thereafter to make new arrange-
ments for a "revolutionary successor."
The consequences of this decision would be momentous.
It would mean, instead of the smooth succession which Mao
had hoped to achieve by conferring power and prestige on
Liu Shao-chi as head of the party apparatus, the start of
a succession struggle. It would necessitate a thorough
purging of all those in the party apparatus who had staked
their careers on the eventual succession to power of Liu
Shao-chi and Teng Hsiao-ping and, as a result, had espoused
the views and policies of these party machine leaders.
It would require enlisting the support of other leaders
whose bases of power lay outside the party apparatus,
principally Lin Piao (indispensable as Commander in Chief
of the People's Liberation Army) and Chou En-lai (also
important as an able administrator and representative of
the government bureaucracy). It would require the con-
struction of an elaborate trap with which to ensnare Liu
Shao-chi and Teng Hsiao-ping and their supporters in the
party apparatus, and the creation of such extra-party mass
Organizations as the Red Guards to supply the element of
force needed to spring this trap. In short, this decision
to select a new "revolutionary successor" would lead, after
the necessary preparations had been made, to the launching
of Mao Tse-tung's "great prole tarian cultural revolution."


Mao thought Peng was "secretly" opposing him?


------

http://www.dhahranbritish.com/history/A14_ReformLiuDeng.htm

Liu wanted population control?

------




https://kc-johnson.com/spring-2010-classes/us-and-cold-war-foreign-policy/
	...According to Mao, “the overturning of (our relations with) the Soviet Union occurred in 1958; that was because they wanted to control China militarily”

	...Mao blamed the Soviets for the Great Leap’s failure

	...“In the early 1960s, Mao repeatedly used the conflict with Moscow to claim that his struggle for true communism was also a struggle for China’s national integrity”

	...China-Soviet alliance virtually dead by 1963-64


https://books.google.com/books?id=5NsMWCHDStQC&pg=PA106
	...Mao ... blamed the Soviet Union for China's economic collapse ...China blamed the Soviet union for the famine.





------


https://books.google.com/books?id=kL03BAAAQBAJ&pg=PA132&lpg=PA132
	Liu Shaoqi explained that if the Chinese failed to support the Vietnamese revolutionaries and allowed the enemy to remain the Chinese would meet more difficulty and trouble on their southern borders.

Liu Shaoqi supported vietnam war

http://digitalarchive.wilsoncenter.org/document/113058.pdf?v=83a47724f0952e4b87e906abd0bce744


says support was Chinese policy--was it?

http://www3.nccu.edu.tw/~lorenzo/Jian%20China%20Involvement%20Vietnam.pdf
	In May, Liu Shaoqi, the second most important leader in China, visited Vietnam. In his meetings with Ho Chi Minh and other Vietnamese leaders, Liu promised them that if the war expanded as the result of their efforts to liberate the South, they "can definitely count on China as the strategic rear."



http://digitalarchive.wilsoncenter.org/document/113382
	3. They ask to send to China Soviet professors of different branches of knowledge (including a professor of Marxism-Leninism) for teaching work in the Chinese higher educational institutions and, for their part, would like:

a. To send to the USSR a group of senior managers (heads of the directories, directors of plants) for 1.5—2 months for studying specific branches of the industry;

b. To organize in the Soviet Union a special educational institution for the Chinese, in which three categories of people could simultaneously study, to the total amount of 1,000 people. 1st category—leading cadres, engineers and technicians with a one year course of study, 2nd category—middle management ranks with a two year course of study, and the 3rd category is the youth with a 5 year course of study. This educational institution could prepare specialists— managers of industry, trade, finance, jurists etc.


http://digitalarchive.wilsoncenter.org/document/113440
	Comrade Stalin said: The victors are not brought to judgment. Victors are always correct.


------

https://www.cia.gov/library/readingroom/docs/DOC_0001086032.pdf
	The Korean war appears to be directed from the joint Sino-Soviet military headquarters. The Chinese Communists are undoubtedly strongly influenced by Soviet military advisors, and it is probable that no major decisions are made in the Korean war without Soviet approval.


------

https://www.cia.gov/library/readingroom/docs/CIA-RDP80-00809A000600310118-6.pdf

disease during a 1950 famine


------


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sino-Soviet_Treaty_of_Friendship,_Alliance_and_Mutual_Assistance
	It was based to a considerable extent on the prior Treaty of the same name that had been arranged between the Soviet Union and the Nationalist government of China in 1945 and it was the product of extended negotiations between Liu Shaoqi and Stalin. 


https://books.google.com/books?id=VdB_CgAAQBAJ&pg=PA57&lpg=PA57&dq=Sino-Soviet+Treaty+of+Friendship,+Alliance+and+Mutual+Assistance+Mongolia&source=bl&ots=Km98jDOqB1&sig=wqnUNaE91veHuerDPeJAskJppzo&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwjP7qeyk8nWAhXCNpoKHcbbBqIQ6AEIZDAK#v=onepage&q=Sino-Soviet%20Treaty%20of%20Friendship%2C%20Alliance%20and%20Mutual%20Assistance%20Mongolia&f=false


says agreement helped China?


------

http://www.nytimes.com/1988/10/14/world/china-sees-summit-with-soviets-in-89.html?mcubz=0

Deng says improved relations with soviets, promises Soviets won't dominate China like 1950's

https://books.google.com/books?id=-NJpAwAAQBAJ&pg=PA216&lpg=PA216


Deng says U.S. involvement with vietnam would extend to China


------






