


http://www.cnn.com/2017/12/01/politics/michael-flynn-latest/index.html

court doc:

	...the defendant falsely stated and represented to agents of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, in Washington, D.C., that:

	(i) On or about December 29, 2016, FLYNN did not ask the Government of Russia's Ambassador to the Untied States ("Russian Ambassador") to refrain from escalating the situation in response to sanctions that the United States had imposed against Russia that same day; and FLYNN did not recall the Russian Ambassador subsequently telling him that Russia had chosen to moderate its response to those sanctions as a result of his requestion; and

	(ii) On or about December 22, 2016, FLYNN did not ask the Russian Ambassador to delay the vote on or defeat a pending United Nations Security Council resolution; and that the Russian Ambassador subsequently never described to FLYNN Russia's response to this request.


Flynn asked Kislyak to moderate response to sanctions and Kislyak told him he would in response to Flynn's request.

Flynn asked Kislyak to delay vote or defeat UNSC resolution.


http://www.cnn.com/2017/12/01/politics/michael-flynn-court-filing/index.html

filing:

Dec 28: Obama does election sanctions

Dec 28: Kislyak contacts FLynn (about what?)

Dec 29: Flynn calls senior Trump official to discuss what to say to Kislyak about the sanctions. Discussed "impact on that administrations foreign policy goals" and discussed that transition team members "did not want Russia to escalate the situation."

Right afteward, Flynn calls Russian Ambassador to ask not to escalate and "respond in a reciprocal manner." Flynn calls Trump official to to report on Kislyak call.

Dec 30: Putin says he won't retaliate

Dec 31: Kislyak calls Flynn to say Russia chose not to retaliate in response to Flynn's request. Flynn tells Trump officials about the call.

Flynn also asked governments to delay or not vote on Isreali settlement resolution while not yet in office and lied to the FBI about it. (violate Logan act?)

Flynn also lied on his FARA application.


http://www.cnn.com/2017/12/01/politics/michael-flynn-latest/index.html

Kushner and Ivanka wanted Flynn as NSA


	December 1, 2017 4:14pm EST

	A person familiar with the Trump transition said that lobbying regarding the UN Security Council vote on Israeli settlements was a well known and a collaborative effort by various transition officials including Reince Priebus, Steve Bannon, General Flynn and Jared Kushner.

	None of them "ordered" or "directed" the others and all were working towards the same goal of standing by Israel, one of the country's greatest allies, as the President's very public comments at the time made clear.


why would they admit to that? isn't this a crime?


white house says Flynn talked to many in transition team about sanctions



https://pastebin.com/mjWXFBDr


https://www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/global-opinions/2017/02/16/c109bd4a-f491-11e6-8d72-263470bf0401_story.html
    ...The White House said in a Dec. 29 conference call with reporters that Obama had informed Trump about the impending sanctions on Dec. 28


http://www.cbsnews.com/news/michael-flynn-in-frequent-contact-with-russias-ambassador-to-u-s/
    During a phone call Friday morning, Trump transition spokesman Sean Spicer said that Flynn had contacted the Russia’s ambassador on Dec. 25 to wish him a Merry Christmas. Spicer also mentioned another contact on Dec. 28, which was the day before the sanctions were announced. He said that on Dec. 28, Flynn texted and called Kislyak to discuss the logistics of setting up a phone call between the president-elect and Russian President Vladimir Putin after Inauguration.
 
    An update published in the Washington Post, citing a Trump official, said Flynn spoke to Kislyak by phone before the sanctions were announced, and the conversation did not cover the sanctions. The Trump official later told the Post that Flynn expressed condolences to Kislyak over the assassination of the Russian ambassador to Turkey on Dec. 19 and then made a second call on Dec. 28 to express condolences for the crash of a Russian plane traveling to Syria and to set up the call with Putin.

http://www.reuters.com/article/us-usa-trump-russia-idUSKBN14X1YX
    Trump adviser had five calls with Russian envoy on day of sanctions: sources
 
    Michael Flynn, President-elect Donald Trump's choice for national security adviser, held five phone calls with Russia's ambassador to Washington on the day the United States retaliated for Moscow's interference in the U.S. presidential election, three sources familiar with the matter said.
 
    The calls occurred between the time the Russian embassy was told about U.S. sanctions and the announcement by Russian President Vladimir Putin that he had decided against reprisals, said the sources.
 
 
http://dailycaller.com/2017/02/14/exclusive-defiant-flynn-insists-he-crossed-no-lines-leakers-must-be-prosecuted/
    Flynn insisted that he crossed no lines in his telephone conversation with Russian Ambassador Sergey Kislyak
 
    ...Flynn said there was a brief discussion of the 35 Russian diplomats who were being expelled by Obama in retaliation for Moscow’s alleged interference in the 2016 campaign.
 
    “It wasn’t about sanctions. It was about the 35 guys who were thrown out,” Flynn said. “So that’s what it turned out to be. It was basically, ‘Look, I know this happened. We’ll review everything.’ I never said anything such as, ‘We’re going to review sanctions,’ or anything like that.”
   
    ...The December conversation “was not to relieve sanctions. It was basically to say, ‘Look, we’re coming into office in a couple of weeks. Give us some time to take a look at everything.’”


https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/national-security/national-security-adviser-flynn-discussed-sanctions-with-russian-ambassador-despite-denials-officials-say/2017/02/09/f85b29d6-ee11-11e6-b4ff-ac2cf509efe5_story.html
    In a recent interview, Kislyak confirmed that he had communicated with Flynn by text message, by phone and in person, but declined to say whether they had discussed sanctions.
 
    ...All of those officials said Flynn’s references to the election-related sanctions were explicit. Two of those officials went further, saying that Flynn urged Russia not to overreact to the penalties being imposed by President Barack Obama, making clear that the two sides would be in position to review the matter after Trump was sworn in as president.
 
    “Kislyak was left with the impression that the sanctions would be revisited at a later time”
 
    ...On Dec. 28, as word of the Obama sanctions spread, Kislyak sent a message to Flynn requesting a call. “Flynn took that call,” Spicer said, adding that it “centered on the logistics of setting up a call with the president of Russia and [Trump] after the election.”


Five calls on day of sanctions to disucss that they "did not want to see Russia escalate the situation," saying "we're coming into office in a couple of Weeks. Give us time to take a look at everything."

also set up call with Trump the day before

Trump also saying its "time to move one" about Russian interference in election


------

 
http://www.nbcnews.com/news/us-news/white-house-we-didn-t-coordinate-flynn-call-russian-ambassador-n706806
    Jan 13 2017, 11:50 pm ET
    White House: We Didn’t Coordinate Flynn Call to Russian Ambassador
 
    ...Spicer said there was nothing unusual about the call, but White House officials told NBC News it was not coordinated with them. It is unclear how the U.S. government became aware of the call, which was first reported by Washington Post columnist David Ignatius, who said there were multiple calls and raised the question of whether the conversations violated the "spirit" of a law that bars private citizens from negotiating with foreign governments. 


some White House officials denied knowledge of the call


------

http://www.reuters.com/article/us-usa-trump-russia-arms-deal-idUSKBN14Z0YE
    Mon Jan 16, 2017 | 7:23am EST
    Trump's offer to Russia: an end to sanctions for nuclear arms cut - London Times
 
    U.S. President-elect Donald Trump will propose offering to end sanctions imposed on Russia over its annexation of Crimea in return for a nuclear arms reduction deal with Moscow, he told The Times of London.


Trump goes on to propose stupid deals on sanctions (this was for crimea sanctions)


------

https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/national-security/fbi-reviewed-flynns-calls-with-russian-ambassador-but-found-nothing-illicit/2017/01/23/aa83879a-e1ae-11e6-a547-5fb9411d332c_story.html
    FBI reviewed Flynn’s calls with Russian ambassador but found nothing illicit
 
    By Ellen Nakashima and Greg Miller January 23
 
    The FBI in late December reviewed intercepts of communications between the Russian ambassador to the United States and retired Lt. Gen. Michael T. Flynn — national security adviser to then-President-elect Trump — but has not found any evidence of wrongdoing or illicit ties to the Russian government, U.S. officials said.
 
    ...Although Flynn’s contacts with Russian Ambassador Sergey Kislyak were listened to, Flynn himself is not the active target of an investigation, U.S. officials said. The Wall Street Journal reported Sunday that U.S. counterintelligence agents had investigated the communications between Flynn and Kislyak.


somehow, Brian Ross gets suspended but this is fine


iirc, Trump responded to media reports on the Flynn case as if they were some kind of negotiation with the intel community. Saw Flynn and WaPo as representing "deep state" (or whatever he thought it was)

Trump then decides Flynn "did nothing wrong" even though WSJ said there was an investigation and he thinks WaPo is fake news

http://www.latimes.com/politics/la-na-pol-trump-news-conference-transcript-20170216-story.html
    TRUMP:  ...And I was a little surprised because I said "doesn't sound like he did anything wrong there." But he did something wrong with respect to the vice president and I thought that was not acceptable. As far as -- as far as the actual making the call, fact I've watched various programs and I've read various articles where he was just doing his job.


Trump "read various articles" saying Flynn was "just doing his job"--what the heck does that mean? You'd think Trump would know more about this than the media, so why is he citing the press on this like they're some kind of authority?


------


White house was also concerned with criminal misconduct by Flynn, McGahn asking about it but Yates fired before she could show the underlying evidence


https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/post-politics/wp/2017/05/08/full-transcript-sally-yates-and-james-clapper-testify-on-russian-election-interference/
    WHITEHOUSE: Did you discuss criminal prosecution of Mr. Flynn -- General Flynn?
 
    YATES: My recollection is that did not really come up much in the first meeting. It did come up in the second meeting, when Mr. McGahn called me back the next morning and asked the -- the morning after -- this is the morning of the 27th, now -- and asked me if I could come back to his office.
 
    And so I went back with the NSD official, and there were essentially four topics that he wanted to discuss there, and one of those topics was precisely that. He asked about the applicability of certain statutes, certain criminal statutes 



Comey diner around this time were Trump asks for loyalty

appearance by most of Trump's actions around this is that an investigation into Flynn would incriminate him


------

https://www.nytimes.com/2017/02/09/us/flynn-is-said-to-have-talked-to-russians-about-sanctions-before-trump-took-office.html
    Flynn Is Said to Have Talked to Russians About Sanctions Before Trump Took Office
 
    By MATTHEW ROSENBERG and MATT APUZZO
    FEB. 9, 2017
 
    Weeks before President Trump’s inauguration, his national security adviser, Michael T. Flynn, discussed American sanctions against Russia, as well as areas of possible cooperation, with that country’s ambassador to the United States, according to current and former American officials.
 
    Throughout the discussions, the message Mr. Flynn conveyed to the ambassador, Sergey I. Kislyak — that the Obama administration was Moscow’s adversary and that relations with Russia would change under Mr. Trump — was unambiguous and highly inappropriate, the officials said.


implying Trump would roll back sanctions?


www.cnn.com/2017/02/10/politics/flynn-russia-us-sanctions-reports/
    Trump says he's unaware of reports Flynn discussed sanctions with Russian ambassador
 
    Updated 7:22 PM ET, Fri February 10, 2017
 
    President Donald Trump said Friday afternoon he was unaware of reports that his national security adviser, Michael Flynn, may have spoken about sanctions with the Russian ambassador before the inauguration.
    Trump, speaking to reporters aboard Air Force One, said he will "look into that."


Trump says he was unaware Flynn discussed sanctions, even after Yates warned the WH about Flynn?


http://www.pbs.org/newshour/rundown/read-james-comeys-prepared-statement-thursdays-senate-hearing/
    February 14 Oval Office Meeting

    ...the President began by saying, “I want to talk about Mike Flynn.” Flynn had resigned the previous day. The President began by saying Flynn hadn’t done anything wrong in speaking with the Russians, but he had to let him go because he had misled the Vice President. He added that he had other concerns about Flynn, which he did not then specify.

	...The President then returned to the topic of Mike Flynn, saying, “He is a good guy and has been through a lot.” He repeated that Flynn hadn’t done anything wrong on his calls with the Russians, but had misled the Vice President. He then said,


Trump insists Flynn didn't do anything wrong in his conversations with the Russians, but is guilty of lying


http://www.latimes.com/politics/la-na-pol-trump-news-conference-transcript-20170216-story.html
    FEBRUARY 16, 2017, 2:55 PM
 
    Russia is fake news. Russia -- this is fake news put out by the media. The real news is the fact that people, probably from the Obama administration because they're there, because we have our new people going in place, right now.
 

	...QUESTION: Did you direct Mike Flynn to discuss sanctions with the Russian ambassador --
 
    TRUMP: No, I didn't.
 
    QUESTION: -- prior to your --
 
    TRUMP: No, I didn't.
 
    QUESTION: -- inauguration.
 
    TRUMP: No, I didn't.
 
    QUESTION: And then fired him --
 
    TRUMP: Excuse me.



------


https://pastebin.com/mjWXFBDr
	Comey reveals that Trump's associates are under a counterintelligence investigation for ties to Russia while Trump rants about it on twitter. That and subsequent revelations are said to put a "big gray cloud" over the Trump administration. Trump continues to insist Obama spied on him. Meanwhile, Trump's associates are stiffing NATO and blocking Sally Yate's testimony on Flynn. Biden wonders "what the hell are we doing." 


Trump was worried about the conversations with Kislyak, tried to argue that the leak of these were criminal and blamed on Obama, blamed Obama for "spying on me"


	...Reading between the lines of Comey's statement, it looks like Trump asks Comey why he publicly confirmed the counterintelligence investigation into his associates, and Comey tells him that Congress wanted it.

	This call is said to be the third time Comey tells Trump he is not under investigation. Trump repeatedly tells Comey "we need get it out" that he is not under investigation, and says it would be good to clear the names of his associates if they haven't done anything wrong. 


Trump also worried about him being under investigation


------


https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/trump-lawyer-says-president-knew-flynn-had-given-fbi-the-same-account-he-gave-to-vice-president/2017/12/03/5c59a620-d849-11e7-a841-2066faf731ef_story.html?hpid=hp_hp-top-table-main_trumpobstruct-1115pm%3Ahomepage%2Fstory&utm_term=.baa18418ca4f

todo: read when not tired



------

https://www.nytimes.com/2017/12/02/us/russia-mcfarland-flynn-trump-emails.html?action=click&pgtype=Homepage&region=CColumn&module=MostViewed&version=Full&src=mv&WT.nav=MostViewed

NY Times emails suggesting Trump team thinking of cooling sanctions retalliation to play down election interference


------


http://abcnews.go.com/Politics/michael-flynn-charged-making-false-statements-fbi-documents/story?id=50849354
	Retired Lt. Gen Michael Flynn has promised “full cooperation” in the special counsel’s Russia investigation and, according to a confidant, is prepared to testify that Donald Trump directed him to make contact with the Russians, initially as a way to work together to fight ISIS in Syria.


so Trump wanted Flynn to contact Russians. Did he want him to make a deal on sanctions too?


	On the same day President Obama imposed tough sanctions on Russian facilities in the U.S. for meddling in the election, the Russian ambassador called Flynn to talk about them. After that conversation, Flynn consulted with a senior transition team official who said the Trump “did not want Russia to escalate the situation,” so Flynn relayed the request directly to Kislyak. 


"the Trump" didn't want Russia to escalate?


	...Correction: During a live Special Report, ABC News reported that a confidant of Lt. Gen. Michael Flynn said Flynn was prepared to testify that then-candidate Donald Trump instructed him to contact Russian officials during the campaign. That source later clarified that during the campaign, Trump assigned Flynn and a small circle of other senior advisers to find ways to repair relations with Russia and other hot spots. It was shortly after the election, that President-elect Trump directed Flynn to contact Russian officials on topics that included working jointly against ISIS. 


"topics that included working jointly against ISIS" ...and what else?


------


https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2017-12-01/kushner-is-said-to-have-asked-flynn-to-contact-russian-envoy
	Kushner Asked Flynn to Contact Russian Ambassador, Sources Say


misleading headline? makes it sound like Kushner asked Flynn to discuss sanctions

https://twitter.com/spettypi


author suspicious


https://www.thedailybeast.com/reports-kushner-was-the-very-senior-trump-official-who-directed-flynn-to-call-russia
	Reports: Kushner Was the ‘Very Senior’ Trump Official Who Directed Flynn to Call Russia

	Joshua Roberts

same deal




------





------





------



https://www.cbsnews.com/news/michael-flynn-in-frequent-contact-with-russias-ambassador-to-u-s/
	An update published in the Washington Post, citing a Trump official, said Flynn spoke to Kislyak by phone before the sanctions were announced, and the conversation did not cover the sanctions. The Trump official later told the Post that Flynn expressed condolences to Kislyak over the assassination of the Russian ambassador to Turkey on Dec. 19 and then made a second call on Dec. 28 to express condolences for the crash of a Russian plane traveling to Syria and to set up the call with Putin.


http://www.cbsnews.com/news/trump-talks-with-putin-merkel-foreign-leaders-phone-calls/
    Trump talks with Putin, foreign leaders in round of phone calls
 
    Last Updated Jan 28, 2017 8:58 PM EST
 
    ...According to a White House readout of the call, the “positive” conversation lasted approximately one hour and discussed topics ranging from “mutual cooperation in defeating ISIS” to efforts in Syria.
 
    “Both President Trump and President Putin are hopeful that after today’s call the two sides can move quickly to tackle terrorism and other important issues of mutual concern,” the readout said. 


------


https://www.cbsnews.com/news/what-sally-yates-said-about-michael-flynn-to-white-house-counsel/
    Sources with direct knowledge tell CBS News that then-acting Attorney General Sally Yates never told White House Counsel Don McGahn that former National Security Adviser Michael Flynn lied or that he was under FBI investigation -- a version of events that contradicts Yates sworn Senate testimony. 


what's up with that?


    ...Yates, an Obamacare administration holdover


"Obamacare administration"?




-----


http://www.cnn.com/2017/12/06/politics/whistleblower-flynn-told-colleague-removing-russia-sanctions-priority/index.html
    Rep. Elijah Cummings of Maryland, the top Democrat on the House Oversight Committee, on Wednesday released his summary of the whistleblower's account detailing Flynn's conversations with colleagues as the Trump administration took power. The account provides the strongest claim yet that the administration was focused on unraveling the sanctions that President Barack Obama had just put in place and that Flynn had a personal motivation for doing so.


Flynn had personal motive for lifting sanctions?