



https://www.dni.gov/files/documents/ICA_2017_01.pdf
	This report is a declassified version of a highly classified assessment; its conclusions are identical to those in the highly classified assessment

	...We assess Russian President Vladimir Putin ordered an influence campaign in 2016 aimed at the US presidential election. ...We further assess Putin and the Russian Government developed a clear preference for President-elect Trump. We have high confidence in these judgments.

	...We also assess Putin and the Russian Government aspired to help President - elect Trump’s election chances when possible

	...Putin has had many positive experiences working with Western political leaders whose business interests made them more disposed to deal with Russia

	...Russian Government–linked actors began openly supporting President elect Trump’s candidacy in media aimed at English-speaking audiences.

	...Russian media hailed President-elect Trump’s victory as a vindication of Putin’s advocacy of global populist movements — the theme of Putin’s annual conference for Western academics in October 2016 — and the latest example of Western liberalism’s collapse.

	...Pro-Kremlin proxy Vladimir Zhirinovskiy, leader of the nationalist Liberal Democratic Party of Russia, proclaimed just before the election that if President-elect Trump won, Russia would “drink champagne” in anticipation of being able to advance its positions on Syria and Ukraine.

	...A journalist who is a leading expert on the Internet Research Agency claimed that some social media accounts that appear to be tied to Russia’s professional trolls — because they previously were devoted to supporting Russian actions in Ukraine — started to advocate for President-elect Trump as early as December 2015.

	...Putin’s public views of the disclosures suggest the Kremlin and the intelligence services will continue to consider using cyber-enabled disclosure operations because of their belief that these can accomplish Russian goals relatively easily without significant damage to Russian interests.


http://www.cnn.com/2016/12/29/politics/russia-sanctions-announced-by-white-house/index.html
	White House announces retaliation against Russia: Sanctions, ejecting diplomats

	..."Russia's cyberactivities were intended to influence the election, erode faith in US democratic institutions, sow doubt about the integrity of our electoral process, and undermine confidence in the institutions of the US government," a White House statement said. "These actions are unacceptable and will not be tolerated."

	..."And what we are saying today is, in response to and in order to impose consequences for the Russian government's increasing harassment and aggression toward our personnel in Moscow, and, of course, their malicious cyberactivities, interfering and an effort to interfere in our election process, we are imposing consequences."


The Russian government interfered in America's elections to elect Trump, and the Obama administration was acting to deter them. At the same time, Trump's incoming administration acted to undercut this deterrence:


http://www.cnn.com/2017/12/01/politics/michael-flynn-court-filing/index.html
	statement of offense

	...On or about December 28, 2016, then-President Barrack Obama signed Executive Order 13757, which was to take effect the following day. The executive order announced sanctions against Russia in response to that government's actions intended to interfere with the 2016 presidential election ("U.S. Sanctions")


https://www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/global-opinions/2017/02/16/c109bd4a-f491-11e6-8d72-263470bf0401_story.html
	...The White House said in a Dec. 29 conference call with reporters that Obama had informed Trump about the impending sanctions on Dec. 28


http://www.cbsnews.com/news/michael-flynn-in-frequent-contact-with-russias-ambassador-to-u-s/
	...Spicer also mentioned another contact on Dec. 28, which was the day before the sanctions were announced. He said that on Dec. 28, Flynn texted and called Kislyak to discuss the logistics of setting up a phone call between the president-elect and Russian President Vladimir Putin after Inauguration.


http://www.cnn.com/2017/12/01/politics/michael-flynn-court-filing/index.html
	...On or about December 29, 2016, FLYNN called a senior official of the Presidential Transition Team ("PTT official"), who was with other senior members of the Presidential Transition Team at the Mar-a-Lago resort in Palm Beach, Florida, to discuss what, if anything, to communicate to the Russian Ambassador about the U.S. Sanctions. On that call, Flynn and the PTT official discussed the U.S. Sanctions, including the potential impact of those sanctions on the incoming administration's foreign policy goals. The PTT official and FLYNN also discussed that the members of the Presidential Transition Team at Mar-a-Lago did not want Russia to escalate the situation.

	...Immediately after his phone call with the PTT official, FLYNN called the Russian Ambassador and requested that Russia not escalate the situation and only respond to the U.S. Sanctions in a reciprocal manner.


https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/national-security/national-security-adviser-flynn-discussed-sanctions-with-russian-ambassador-despite-denials-officials-say/2017/02/09/f85b29d6-ee11-11e6-b4ff-ac2cf509efe5_story.html
	...All of those officials said Flynn’s references to the election-related sanctions were explicit. Two of those officials went further, saying that Flynn urged Russia not to overreact to the penalties being imposed by President Barack Obama, making clear that the two sides would be in position to review the matter after Trump was sworn in as president.
 
	“Kislyak was left with the impression that the sanctions would be revisited at a later time”


http://dailycaller.com/2017/02/14/exclusive-defiant-flynn-insists-he-crossed-no-lines-leakers-must-be-prosecuted/
	Flynn insisted that he crossed no lines in his telephone conversation with Russian Ambassador Sergey Kislyak
 
	...Flynn said there was a brief discussion of the 35 Russian diplomats who were being expelled by Obama in retaliation for Moscow’s alleged interference in the 2016 campaign.
 
	“It wasn’t about sanctions. It was about the 35 guys who were thrown out,” Flynn said. “So that’s what it turned out to be. It was basically, ‘Look, I know this happened. We’ll review everything.’ I never said anything such as, ‘We’re going to review sanctions,’ or anything like that.”
   
	...The December conversation “was not to relieve sanctions. It was basically to say, ‘Look, we’re coming into office in a couple of weeks. Give us some time to take a look at everything.’”


http://www.cnn.com/2017/12/01/politics/michael-flynn-court-filing/index.html
	...On or about December 30, 2016, Russian President Vladimir Putin released a statement indicating that Russia would not take retaliatory measures in response to the U.S. Sanctions at that time.

	...On or about December 31, 2016, the Russian Ambassador called FLYNN and informed him that Russia had chosen not to retaliate in response to FLYNN's request.


https://twitter.com/realdonaldtrump/status/814919370711461890
	Donald J. Trump

	Great move on delay (by V. Putin) - I always knew he was very smart!
	11:41 AM - 30 Dec 2016 


Trump knew about the incoming sanctions, and Flynn set up a phone call between Trump and Putin before leaving the Russian ambassador with the impression that the sanctions would be revisited after Trump took office. The Russian government, in an apparent show of confidence that they would get away with their meddling, decided not to respond to the sanctions, citing the Russian ambassador's contacts with Flynn. Trump would go one to dispute that the election meddling occurred at all.

This is a very big deal, because it gets to the heart of a question that American's must answer if we want to live in a democracy: how do we deter foreign meddling in our elections? If a foreign power can meddle in our elections and elect a sycophant who will let them get away with it, what's to stop them from doing it again? Trump's administration acted to undercut the deterrence for the very meddling that got him elected--if we want to enforce free and fair elections in this country, this behavior cannot be allowed.

An important question here is: how directly was the President involved in helping the Russian government get away with meddling in our elections? In one way, the President's involvement is clear, overt, and direct: in his public statements, Trump has consistently shifted blame away from Russia, including statements made almost immediately after the sanctions:


http://www.politico.com/story/2016/12/trump-russian-cyberattacks-intelligence-233045
	Trump: It's time 'to move on' from claims of Russian interference in election
 
	The president-elect also pledges to meet with leaders of the intelligence community 'to be updated on the facts.'
 
	By Nolan D. McCaskill
 
	12/29/2016 06:14 PM EST
 
	Insisting it's time "to move on," President-elect Donald Trump said Thursday he will nonetheless meet next week with leaders of the intelligence community "to be updated on the facts" of alleged Russian cyberattacks.
 
	“It's time for our country to move on to bigger and better things,” he said in a statement. “Nevertheless, in the interest of our country and its great people, I will meet with leaders of the intelligence community next week in order to be updated on the facts of this situation.”


https://www.nytimes.com/2016/12/31/us/politics/donald-trump-russia-hacking.html
	Trump Promises a Revelation on Hacking
 
	By MAGGIE HABERMAN
	DEC. 31, 2016
 
	President-elect Donald J. Trump, expressing lingering skepticism about intelligence assessments of Russian interference in the election, said on Saturday evening that he knew “things that other people don’t know” about the hacking, and that the information would be revealed “on Tuesday or Wednesday.”
 
	Speaking to a handful of reporters outside his Palm Beach, Fla., club, Mar-a-Lago, Mr. Trump cast his declarations of doubt as an effort to seek the truth.
 
	“I just want them to be sure because it’s a pretty serious charge,” Mr. Trump said of the intelligence agencies. “If you look at the weapons of mass destruction, that was a disaster, and they were wrong,” he added, referring to intelligence cited by the George W. Bush administration to support its march to war in 2003. “So I want them to be sure,” the president-elect said. “I think it’s unfair if they don’t know.”
 
	He added: “And I know a lot about hacking. And hacking is a very hard thing to prove. So it could be somebody else. And I also know things that other people don’t know, and so they cannot be sure of the situation.”

	...Mr. Trump, who has sought a warmer relationship with Mr. Putin, has repeatedly scoffed at the notion that Russia was behind the hacking, a stance at odds with members of his own party. At one point, Mr. Trump declared that the hacking may have been the work of “someone sitting on their bed weighing 400 pounds.”


But Trump might be guilty of more than just misleading the public. By all indications, the President knew about Flynn's calls with the Russian ambassador, knew they were being scrutinized for wrongdoing, and acted to conceal this wrongdoing and obstruct potential criminal proceedings related to the calls.

According to the ABC news report, Trump directed Flynn to contact the Russian government after the election:


http://abcnews.go.com/Politics/michael-flynn-charged-making-false-statements-fbi-documents/story?id=50849354
	...The White House had claimed it was unaware of the substance of those conversations, but today’s court documents show Flynn was acting specifically at the direction of senior transition team officials.

	On the same day President Obama imposed tough sanctions on Russian facilities in the U.S. for meddling in the election, the Russian ambassador called Flynn to talk about them. After that conversation, Flynn consulted with a senior transition team official who said the Trump “did not want Russia to escalate the situation,” so Flynn relayed the request directly to Kislyak.

	...The President has denied directing Flynn to make the contacts.

	“No, I didn’t direct him,” Trump said in February, “but I would have directed him if he didn’t do it, okay?” 

	...It was shortly after the election, that President-elect Trump directed Flynn to contact Russian officials on topics that included working jointly against ISIS.


https://www.nytimes.com/2017/02/09/us/flynn-is-said-to-have-talked-to-russians-about-sanctions-before-trump-took-office.html
	...Weeks before President Trump’s inauguration, his national security adviser, Michael T. Flynn, discussed American sanctions against Russia, as well as areas of possible cooperation, with that country’s ambassador to the United States, according to current and former American officials.
 
	Throughout the discussions, the message Mr. Flynn conveyed to the ambassador, Sergey I. Kislyak — that the Obama administration was Moscow’s adversary and that relations with Russia would change under Mr. Trump — was unambiguous and highly inappropriate, the officials said.



Whether Trump directed Flynn to discuss the sanctions with Russia or not, his actions in relation to Flynn's calls with the Russian ambassador demonstrate guilt:



https://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2017/02/14/press-briefing-press-secretary-sean-spicer-2142017-12
	MR. SPICER: ...The evolving and eroding level of trust as a result of this situation and a series of other questionable instances is what led the President to ask for General Flynn’s resignation. Immediately after the Department of Justice notified the White House Counsel of the situation, the White House Counsel briefed the President and a small group of senior advisors.


http://www.latimes.com/politics/la-na-pol-trump-news-conference-transcript-20170216-story.html
	February 16, 2017

	TRUMP: ...As far as the general's concerned, when I first heard about it, I said huh, that doesn't sound wrong. My counsel came, Don McGahn, White House Counsel, and he told me and I asked him, he can speak very well for himself. He said he doesn't think anything is wrong, you know, really didn't think.

	It was really, what happened after that but he didn't think anything was done wrong. I didn't either because I waited a period of time and I started to think about it, I said "well I don't see" -- to me, he was doing the job.
 
	The information was provided by -- who I don't know, Sally Yates. And I was a little surprised because I said "doesn't sound like he did anything wrong there." 


https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/post-politics/wp/2017/05/08/full-transcript-sally-yates-and-james-clapper-testify-on-russian-election-interference/
	YATES: So I told them again that there were a number of press accounts of statements that had been made by the vice president and other high-ranking White House officials about General Flynn's conduct that we knew to be untrue. And we told them how we knew that this - how we had this information, how we had acquired it, and how we knew that it was untrue.

	And we walked the White House Counsel who also had an associate there with him through General Flynn's underlying conduct ...we took him through in a fair amount of detail of the underlying conduct, what General Flynn had done, and then we walked through the various press accounts and how it had been falsely reported.

	We also told the White House Counsel that General Flynn had been interviewed by the FBI on February 24. Mr. McGahn asked me how he did and I declined to give him an answer to that. And we then walked through with Mr. McGahn essentially why we were telling them about this and the first thing we did was to explain to Mr. McGahn that the underlying conduct that General Flynn had engaged in was problematic in and of itself.

	...WHITEHOUSE: Did you discuss criminal prosecution of Mr. Flynn -- General Flynn?
 
	YATES: My recollection is that did not really come up much in the first meeting. It did come up in the second meeting, when Mr. McGahn called me back the next morning and asked the -- the morning after -- this is the morning of the 27th, now -- and asked me if I could come back to his office.
 
	And so I went back with the NSD official, and there were essentially four topics that he wanted to discuss there, and one of those topics was precisely that. He asked about the applicability of certain statutes, certain criminal statutes

	...The first topic in the second meeting was essentially why does it matter to DOJ if one White House official lies to another. The second topic related to the applicability of criminal statutes and the likelihood that the Department of Justice would pursue a criminal case. The third topic was his concern that their taking action might interfere with an investigation of Mr. Flynn. And the fourth topic was his request to see the underlying evidence.


In a press conference on February 16, 2017, Trump said that when white House Counsel Don McGahn first told him acting AG Yates' account of Flynn's calls, he believed that nothing was wrong with them. But according to Yates' testimony, on Jan 26, Yates informed McGahn that Flynn had been interviewed by the FBI, explained Flynn's conduct in detail and told McGahn that not only did Flynn lie about the calls to the Vice President, but that the calls were problematic in and of themselves. The next day, McGahn called Yates to ask about the "applicability of certain criminal statutes," ask if taking action would interfere with any investigation of Flynn, and request to see the underlying evidence of Flynn's conduct. These actions aren't characteristic of someone who believed "nothing was wrong."

In that same press conference, Trump cited reading "various articles" as why he thought nothing was wrong with Flynn's calls:


http://www.latimes.com/politics/la-na-pol-trump-news-conference-transcript-20170216-story.html
	February 16, 2017

	TRUMP:  ...And I was a little surprised because I said "doesn't sound like he did anything wrong there." But he did something wrong with respect to the vice president and I thought that was not acceptable. As far as -- as far as the actual making the call, fact I've watched various programs and I've read various articles where he was just doing his job.


https://www.wsj.com/articles/u-s-eyes-michael-flynns-links-to-russia-1485134942
https://www.dowjones.com/scoops/u-s-eyes-michael-flynns-links-russia/
	U.S. Eyes Michael Flynn’s Links to Russia
	By Carol E. Lee, Devlin Barrett and Shane Harris
	Jan. 22, 2017 8:29 p.m. ET
 
	Counterintelligence agents have investigated communications by President Trump’s national security adviser, including phone calls to Russian ambassador in late December
 
	Michael Flynn is the first person inside the White House under Mr. Trump whose communications are known to have faced scrutiny as part of investigations by the Federal Bureau of Investigation, Central Intelligence Agency, National Security Agency and Treasury Department to determine the extent of Russian government contacts with people close to Mr. Trump.
 
	It isn’t clear when the counterintelligence inquiry began, whether it produced any incriminating evidence or if it is continuing. Mr. Flynn, a retired general who became national security adviser with Mr. Trump’s inauguration, plays a key role in setting U.S. policy toward Russia.
 
	The counterintelligence inquiry aimed to determine the nature of Mr. Flynn’s contact with Russian officials and whether such contacts may have violated laws, people familiar with the matter said.

	...In a statement Sunday night, the White House said it has “absolutely no knowledge of any investigation or even a basis for such an investigation.”


http://www.cnn.com/2017/01/23/politics/flynn-russia-calls-investigation/index.html
	US investigating Flynn calls with Russian diplomat
 
	Updated 7:50 PM ET, Mon January 23, 2017
 
	US investigators are scrutinizing late December calls between Mike Flynn, President Donald Trump's national security adviser, and Russia's ambassador to the US as part of a broader counterintelligence investigation of Russian activities in the US, law enforcement and intelligence officials told CNN.
 
	The calls were captured by routine US eavesdropping targeting the Russian diplomats, according to the intelligence and law enforcement officials. But the officials said some of the content of the conversation raised enough potential concerns that investigators are still looking into the discussions, amid a broader concern about Russian intelligence-gathering activities in the United States.
 
	The officials all stressed that so far there has been no determination of any wrongdoing.
 
	...Among the communications being scrutinized are calls between Russia's ambassador, Sergey Kislyak, and Flynn on December 29.

 
https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/national-security/fbi-reviewed-flynns-calls-with-russian-ambassador-but-found-nothing-illicit/2017/01/23/aa83879a-e1ae-11e6-a547-5fb9411d332c_story.html
	FBI reviewed Flynn’s calls with Russian ambassador but found nothing illicit
 
	By Ellen Nakashima and Greg Miller January 23
 
	The FBI in late December reviewed intercepts of communications between the Russian ambassador to the United States and retired Lt. Gen. Michael T. Flynn — national security adviser to then-President-elect Trump — but has not found any evidence of wrongdoing or illicit ties to the Russian government, U.S. officials said.
 
	...Although Flynn’s contacts with Russian Ambassador Sergey Kislyak were listened to, Flynn himself is not the active target of an investigation, U.S. officials said. The Wall Street Journal reported Sunday that U.S. counterintelligence agents had investigated the communications between Flynn and Kislyak.
 
 
http://www.washingtonexaminer.com/report-fbi-clears-flynn-of-wrongdoing-in-talk-with-russian-ambassador/article/2612774
	...The Post reported Flynn did not commit any wrongdoing and there is no evidence of illicit ties between him and the Russian government.
 
 
http://dailycaller.com/2017/01/23/report-probe-of-michael-flynns-russia-phone-calls-found-nothing-illicit/
	...Michael Flynn, was not the target of a counter-intelligence investigation of his contacts with Russia’s ambassador to the U.S., contrary to reports on Sunday suggesting that he was, according to The Washington Post.
 
 
http://www.breitbart.com/national-security/2017/01/25/fbi-nothing-illicit-flynns-calls-russian-ambassador/
	...The Post flatly states that “Flynn himself is not the active target of an investigation, U.S. officials said.”
 
	Other reports, such as a Sunday posting from the Wall Street Journal, have said it was unclear if any Flynn investigations were still in progress.
 

http://www.latimes.com/politics/la-na-pol-trump-news-conference-transcript-20170216-story.html
	TRUMP: ...And I'll tell you something, I'll be honest, because I sort of enjoy this back and forth that I guess I have all my life but I've never seen more dishonest media than frankly, the political media. I thought the financial media was much better, much more honest.
 

But in the days leading up to Yates' warning to the White House, there were multiple conflicting articles on the calls, some saying that investigators found nothing wrong and others saying the investigation was ongoing. Washington Post appears to have be the source for the articles claiming investigators found nothing illicit. Yet Trump chose to believe Washington Post's version of events over the Wall Street Journal's, despite his disdain for Washington Post (e.g. http://www.nbcnews.com/politics/2016-election/trump-revokes-washington-post-s-press-credentials-n591586) and his belief that the "financial media" are "much more honest."

By all indications, Trump knew that Flynn's calls with the Russian ambassador were under investigation and that there was a possibility investigators would find wrongdoing. Yet Trump made public statements claiming he believed nothing was wrong, citing reasons that don't hold up to scrutiny.

In fact, the President has shown intent to conceal Flynn's misconduct. President Trump said he knew Flynn "didn't tell the vice president properly the facts:"
 
http://www.latimes.com/politics/la-na-pol-trump-news-conference-transcript-20170216-story.html
    TRUMP: Mike Flynn is a fine person, and I asked for his resignation. He respectfully gave it. He is a man who there was a certain amount of information given to Vice President Pence, who is with us today. And I was not happy with the way that information was given.
  
    ...You know, he was doing his job. The thing is, he didn't tell our vice president properly, and then he said he didn't remember. So either way, it wasn't very satisfactory to me. And I have somebody that I think will be outstanding for the position. And that also helps, I think, in the making of my decision.
 
    But he didn't tell the vice president of the United States the facts. And then he didn't remember. And that just wasn't acceptable to me.
 
    ...TRUMP: No, I fired him because of what he said to Mike Pence. Very simple. Mike was doing his job. He was calling countries and his counterparts.
 
 
But if the President was as concerned about Flynn lying to Vice President Pence as he suggests, he didn't show it. Pence didn't learn that Flynn lied to him until 15 days after Yates warned the White House:
 

http://www.nbcnews.com/politics/politics-news/aide-claims-pattern-keep-vice-president-pence-out-loop-n761916
    The White House kept Vice President Mike Pence in the dark for weeks about the warning it had gotten about national security adviser Michael Flynn from the Justice Department, Pence's press secretary said Tuesday.

    Pence did not find out until Feb. 9, according to Marc Lotter.


https://www.nytimes.com/2017/02/09/us/flynn-is-said-to-have-talked-to-russians-about-sanctions-before-trump-took-office.html
    Flynn Is Said to Have Talked to Russians About Sanctions Before Trump Took Office
 
    FEB. 9, 2017


https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/national-security/national-security-adviser-flynn-discussed-sanctions-with-russian-ambassador-despite-denials-officials-say/2017/02/09/f85b29d6-ee11-11e6-b4ff-ac2cf509efe5_story.html
    National security adviser Flynn discussed sanctions with Russian ambassador, despite denials, officials say

    February 9 2017


http://thehill.com/policy/national-security/318872-flynn-talked-sanctions-against-russia-with-ambassador-report
    Flynn talked sanctions against Russia with ambassador: report

    02/09/17


www.cnn.com/2017/02/10/politics/flynn-russia-us-sanctions-reports/
    Trump says he's unaware of reports Flynn discussed sanctions with Russian ambassador
 
    Updated 7:22 PM ET, Fri February 10, 2017
 
    President Donald Trump said Friday afternoon he was unaware of reports that his national security adviser, Michael Flynn, may have spoken about sanctions with the Russian ambassador before the inauguration.
    
    Trump, speaking to reporters aboard Air Force One, said he will "look into that."


http://www.nbcnews.com/politics/politics-news/aide-claims-pattern-keep-vice-president-pence-out-loop-n761916
    ...Trump was first informed about the Justice Department's concerns regarding Flynn on Jan. 26, White House Press Secretary Sean Spicer said at Tuesday's daily press briefing.
 
    ...This would be the second time that Pence claims he was kept in the dark about possible Flynn wrongdoings, despite the White House’s alleged knowledge of them. Earlier this year, Pence said he was not made aware of Flynn's discussions with Russian officials until 15 days after Trump and the White House were notified. 
 
 
And the White House was surely made aware that Flynn's conduct was problematic:
 

https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/post-politics/wp/2017/05/08/full-transcript-sally-yates-and-james-clapper-testify-on-russian-election-interference/
    YATES: ...And we then walked through with Mr. McGahn essentially why we were telling them about this and the first thing we did was to explain to Mr. McGahn that the underlying conduct that General Flynn had engaged in was problematic in and of itself.
 
    ...that created a compromise situation, a situation where the national security adviser essentially could be blackmailed by the Russians. Finally, we told them that we were giving them all of this information so that they could take action, the action that they deemed appropriate.
 
 
If the President knew Flynn had conducted himself improperly, that he lied to the Vice President, that this lie created a serious situation that the White House should act on immediately, and that Flynn had been interviewed by the FBI, why did the President hide this from even his own Vice President? By the time Pence learned of Flynn's misconduct, the media had already broken the story.

Trump's actions following Yates' January 26th warning to the White House also suggest he was worried his administration was in legal jeopardy. A few hours after McGahn called Yates to ask about the possibility of criminal proceedings on January 27th, Trump called FBI Director Comey for an impromptu dinner meeting:


http://www.nbcnews.com/news/us-news/did-trump-raise-mike-flynn-s-fbi-troubles-comey-dinner-n759761
	Three days before Trump's dinner with Comey, on January 24, FBI agents came to the White House to interview Flynn about his discussions with Ambassador Kislyak.
 
	That means Trump would have known about the FBI and Justice Department concerns about Flynn — one of his closest advisers — when he sat down to dinner with Comey.
 
	...Former director of national intelligence James Clapper told NBC News' Andrea Mitchell that he was with Comey during the day on the 27th, at an FBI farewell for Clapper.
 
	"He mentioned that he had been invited to the White House to have dinner with the president, and he was uneasy with that because of… even the appearance of compromising the independence of the FBI," Clapper said.
 
	But, Clapper added, "Anyone who is a serving office in the government and you are asked by the president to dinner…you are in a difficult position to refuse to go." 


http://www.pbs.org/newshour/rundown/read-james-comeys-prepared-statement-thursdays-senate-hearing/
    January 27 Dinner
 
    The President and I had dinner on Friday, January 27 at 6:30 pm in the Green Room at the White House. He had called me at lunchtime that day and invited me to dinner that night
 
    ...The President began by asking me whether I wanted to stay on as FBI Director, which I found strange because he had already told me twice in earlier conversations that he hoped I would stay, and I had assured him that I intended to. He said that lots of people wanted my job and, given the abuse I had taken during the previous year, he would understand if I wanted to walk away.
 
    My instincts told me that the one-on-one setting, and the pretense that this was our first discussion about my position, meant the dinner was, at least in part, an effort to have me ask for my job and create some sort of patronage relationship. That concerned me greatly, given the FBI’s traditionally independent status in the executive branch.
 
    I replied that I loved my work and intended to stay and serve out my ten-year term as Director. And then, because the set-up made me uneasy, I added that I was not “reliable” in the way politicians use that word, but he could always count on me to tell him the truth. I added that I was not on anybody’s side politically and could not be counted on in the traditional political sense, a stance I said was in his best interest as the President.
 
    A few moments later, the President said, “I need loyalty, I expect loyalty.” I didn’t move, speak, or change my facial expression in any way during the awkward silence that followed. We simply looked at each other in silence. The conversation then moved on, but he returned to the subject near the end of our dinner.

    ...At one point, I explained why it was so important that the FBI and the Department of Justice be independent of the White House. I said it was a paradox: Throughout history, some Presidents have decided that because “problems” come from Justice, they should try to hold the Department close. But blurring those boundaries ultimately makes the problems worse by undermining public trust in the institutions and their work.
 
    Near the end of our dinner, the President returned to the subject of my job, saying he was very glad I wanted to stay, adding that he had heard great things about me from Jim Mattis, Jeff Sessions, and many others. He then said, “I need loyalty.” I replied, “You will always get honesty from me.” He paused and then said, “That’s what I want, honest loyalty.” I paused, and then said, “You will get that from me.” As I wrote in the memo I created immediately after the dinner, it is possible we understood the phrase “honest loyalty” differently, but I decided it wouldn’t be productive to push it further. The term – honest loyalty – had helped end a very awkward conversation and my explanations had made clear what he should expect.


Trump asked Comey if he wanted to keep his job, and after he said yes, asked for his loyalty. Comey explained that the FBI needs to be independent, but Trump asked Comey for loyalty a second time at the end of the dinner.

If Trump felt satisfied he had Comey's loyalty, it looks like he was less confident about then-acting Attorney General Yates. A few days after Yates' warned the White House about Flynn's misconduct, the President fired Yates for suspicious circumstances. Trump claims he fired Yates for "refusing to enforce a legal order designed to protect the citizens of the United State," which could only be referring to the travel ban executive order Trump issued a few days earlier.
 
The problems with this reason are: 1. It was far from clear even then that the executive order was legal (the ban was struck down in court a few weeks later: https://www.nytimes.com/2017/02/09/us/politics/appeals-court-trump-travel-ban.html), and 2. Trump created this very legal quandary that he fired Yates over on January 27th, shortly after learning Flynn was under investigation.
 
The President's executive order caught most of the country off-guard:
 
https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/checkpoint/wp/2017/01/30/pentagon-begins-compiling-list-of-iraqis-who-could-get-special-consideration-under-trumps-travel-ban/
    Pentagon, caught by surprise by Trump’s travel ban, pushes for some Iraqis to get special consideration
 
 
https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/post-politics/wp/2017/05/08/full-transcript-sally-yates-and-james-clapper-testify-on-russian-election-interference/
    YATES: No and that was one thing that was of concern to us, is that not only was department leadership not consulted here and beyond department leadership, really the subject matter experts, the national security experts, not only was the department not consulted, we weren't even told about it. I learned about this from media reports.
 
    KLOBUCHAR: So you learned about it after the meeting at the White house Council from the media.
 
    YATES: Right.
 
 
http://www.news.com.au/travel/travel-updates/incidents/airlines-caught-unprepared-by-trumps-ban-on-us-travel/news-story/e2b9d1590f4af0ddfdfd90af062f22da
    Airlines caught unprepared by Trump’s ban on US travel
 
 
https://www.nytimes.com/2017/01/29/us/politics/donald-trump-rush-immigration-order-chaos.html
    How Trump’s Rush to Enact an Immigration Ban Unleashed Global Chaos
 
 
When a reporter brought up the execution of the travel ban, the President offered an excuse for why he rushed his executive order:
 
http://www.latimes.com/politics/la-na-pol-trump-news-conference-transcript-20170216-story.html
    QUESTION: On the travel ban -- we could banter back and forth. On the travel ban would you accept that that was a good example of the smooth running of government...
 
    TRUMP: Yeah, I do. I do. Let me tell you about this government...
 
    QUESTION: Were there any mistakes...
 
    TRUMP: Wait. Wait. I know who you are. Just wait.
 
    Let me tell you about the travel ban. We had a very smooth rollout of the travel ban. But we had a bad court. Got a bad decision. We had a court that's been overturned. Again, may be wrong. But I think it's 80 percent of the time, a lot.
 
    We had a bad decision. We're going to keep going with that decision. We're going to put in a new executive order next week some time. But we had a bad decision.
 
    ...Now, what I wanted to do was do the exact same executive order, but said one thing. I said this to my people. Give them a one-month period of time. But Gen. Kelly, now Sec. Kelly, said if you do that, all these people will come in and (inaudible) the bad ones.
 
    You do agree there are bad people out there, right? That not everybody that's like you. You have some bad people out there.
 
    Kelly said you can't do that. And he was right. As soon as he said it I said wow, never thought of it. I said how about one week? He said no good. You got to do it immediately because if you do it immediately they don't have time to come in.
 
    Now nobody ever reports that. But that's why we did it quickly.
 
    Now, if I would've done it a month, everything would've been perfect. The problem is we would've wasted a lot of time, and maybe a lot of lives because a lot of bad people would've come into our country.
 
 
If President Trump's motivation to enact the ban "immediately" was truly for the safety of the United States, one has to wonder why the President didn't sign the order when it was reportedly ready, on January 25th:
 
http://www.cnbc.com/2017/01/24/trump-to-restrict-immigration-from-several-middle-east-countries-reuters.html
    U.S. President Donald Trump is expected to sign several executive orders on Wednesday restricting immigration from Syria and six other Middle Eastern or African countries, according to several congressional aides and immigration experts briefed on the matter.
 
 
Trump didn't sign his travel ban until the 27th, after the second meeting between Yates and McGahn. It was during this meeting that McGahn asked about criminal proceedings arising from the calls and Yates invited McGahn to view the evidence underlying Flynn's conduct.
 
After the President's travel ban was hastily implemented on the 27th, it was widely protested for being a thinly-veiled ban on Muslim immigrants:
 
 
http://www.huffingtonpost.com/entry/protestors-flood-nycs-washington-square-park-in-anticipation-of-muslim-ban_us_58893575e4b0737fd5cb81db
 
http://www.thedailystar.net/world/protesters-fill-nyc-park-protest-muslim-immigration-ban-1351291
 
https://www.democracynow.org/2017/1/26/headlines/thousands_protest_trumps_immigration_crackdown_in_nyc_dc_la
 
 
This is a bad look for the President, since making laws that discriminate based on religion is unconstitutional. But instead, the next day, a surrogate of President Trump went on Fox News to say that the President intended for his order to be a Muslim ban:
 
http://thehill.com/homenews/administration/316726-giuliani-trump-asked-me-how-to-do-a-muslim-ban-legally
    Former New York City Mayor Rudy Giuliani (R) said in an interview on Saturday that President Trump had previously asked him about legally implementing a "Muslim ban."
 
    But Giuliani then disputed the notion that the president's sweeping executive order barring refugees and people from seven predominantly Muslim nations amounts to a ban on Muslims.
 
    "I’ll tell you the whole history of it: When he first announced it, he said ‘Muslim ban,'" Giuliani said on Fox News.
 
    "He called me up, he said, ‘Put a commission together, show me the right way to do it legally.’"
 
    Giuliani said he then put together a commission that included lawmakers and expert lawyers.
 
    "And what we did was we focused on, instead of religion, danger," Giuliani said.
 
    "The areas of the world that create danger for us, which is a factual basis, not a religious basis. Perfectly legal, perfectly sensible."
 
    Giuliani reiterated that the ban is "not based on religion."
 
    "It's based on places where there are substantial evidence that people are sending terrorists into our country," he said.
 
 
This an unusual move, since, as logic has it, admitting the executive order was intended to be a Muslim ban would only add to the outrage. But this and other statements by Trump's team did make the executive order hard to legally defend, as Yates said in her January 30th statement:
 
https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2017/01/30/us/document-Letter-From-Sally-Yates.html
    ...Its review does not take account of statements made by an administration or its surrogates close in time to the issuance of an Executive Order that may bear on the order's purpose.
 
    ...I am not convinced that the defense of the Executive Order is consistent with these responsibilities nor am I convinced that the Executive Order is lawful.
 
This is bad optics for the President, since it would not have been hard at that time to figure that this move would lead to Sally Yates refusing to defend his executive order, and indeed be pivotal in doing so, as it established an unconstitutional intent or "purpose" behind the order. But Yates' refusing to defend his travel ban was exactly the reason the President gave for firing her--the President created the reason he gave for firing the acting Attorney General, inexplicably, and shortly after learning the Justice Department had interviewed Flynn and viewed his calls with the Russian Ambassador as "problematic."

Shortly after he was confronted by the Justice Department, the President called an impromptu meeting with his FBI director to ask for loyalty, acted hastily and suspiciously to create an alibi for firing the acting Attorney General, then acted to conceal the misconduct in Flynn's calls to the Russian ambassador from the Vice President and the public. This sequence of events and the circumstances surrounding them strongly suggest that the President likewise fired acting Attorney General Yates to conceal this misconduct and preclude any criminal proceedings that might arise from it, which would be obstruction of justice.

If it's also true that Trump directed Flynn's calls with the Russian ambassador, it would look even worse for Trump--it would mean that Trump knew the whole time he would be directly implicated in any investigation of the calls. And that's pretty close to what ABC news reported a few days ago: that Trump directed Flynn to contact Russian officials after the election (on "topics including working jointly against ISIS"). But for whatever reason multiple major media outlets have treated this story like it's inconsequential:


http://abcnews.go.com/Politics/michael-flynn-charged-making-false-statements-fbi-documents/story?id=50849354
    ...The White House had claimed it was unaware of the substance of those conversations, but today’s court documents show Flynn was acting specifically at the direction of senior transition team officials.

    On the same day President Obama imposed tough sanctions on Russian facilities in the U.S. for meddling in the election, the Russian ambassador called Flynn to talk about them. After that conversation, Flynn consulted with a senior transition team official who said the Trump “did not want Russia to escalate the situation,” so Flynn relayed the request directly to Kislyak.

    ...The President has denied directing Flynn to make the contacts.

    “No, I didn’t direct him,” Trump said in February, “but I would have directed him if he didn’t do it, okay?”


https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SAJqTE15xbQ
    Ross: [Flynn] is prepared to testify that president Trump as a candidate ordered him, directed him, to make contact with the Russians


http://abcnews.go.com/Politics/michael-flynn-charged-making-false-statements-fbi-documents/story?id=50849354
    ...**Correction:** During a live Special Report, ABC News reported that a confidant of Lt. Gen. Michael Flynn said Flynn was prepared to testify that then-candidate Donald Trump instructed him to contact Russian officials during the campaign. That source later clarified that during the campaign, Trump assigned Flynn and a small circle of other senior advisers to find ways to repair relations with Russia and other hot spots. It was shortly after the election, that President-elect Trump directed Flynn to contact Russian officials on topics that included working jointly against ISIS. 


https://www.buzzfeed.com/stevenperlberg/abc-news-is-reeling-from-brian-rosss-botched-report
    ABC News Is Reeling From Brian Ross’s Botched Report

    “Everyone is just in shock and very upset,” said one ABC News staffer


https://www.cnbc.com/2017/12/01/abc-news-issues-corrects-bombshell-michael-flynn-report.html
    ABC News clarifies, then corrects its bombshell report of Michael Flynn's discussions with Russia

    ...by Friday evening, the network had backtracked, saying Flynn would likely state that Trump's instructions occurred after the election. That distinction effectively altered the timeline and lessened the significance of the discussions — which according to ABC's report were meant to galvanize U.S.-Russian efforts to fight ISIS in Syria.


https://www.huffingtonpost.com/entry/abcclarifies-micheal-flynn-report_us_5a2219b1e4b03c44072db2ac
    ABC News issued a correction late Friday to its report that former national security adviser Michael Flynn was prepared to testify that Donald Trump told him to reach out to Russian officials during the presidential campaign.

    The network amended the story to note that Trump instructed Flynn to do so during the transition after the election — not during the campaign. Flynn was told to discuss working together to defeat the self-described Islamic State militant group in Syria, according to ABC.


https://www.washingtonpost.com/national/abc-news-suspends-brian-ross-for-erroneous-flynn-report/2017/12/02/0ed8f408-d7c4-11e7-9ad9-ca0619edfa05_story.html
    After erroneous Flynn report, ABC News suspends Brian Ross

    ...Ross, citing an unnamed confidant of Flynn, the former national security adviser, had reported Friday that then-candidate Donald Trump had directed Flynn to make contact with the Russians. That would have been an explosive development in the ongoing investigation into whether the Trump campaign colluded with Russia to interfere in the election. But hours later, Ross clarified his report on the evening news, saying that his source now said Trump had done so not as a candidate, but as president-elect.


https://www.nytimes.com/reuters/2017/12/02/world/europe/02reuters-usa-trump-russia-abc.html
    ABC News Suspends Top Journalist Over Inaccurate Flynn Reporting

    ...ABC News reported that Flynn, citing a confidant, was prepared to testify that Trump directed him to make contact with Russians when he was a presidential candidate.

    Wall Street's main indexes all fell by more than 1 percent after the report.

    ABC News later issued a correction that the source clarified that Trump had assigned Flynn and a "small circle of senior advisers" to find ways to improve relations with Russia and other hotspots during the presidential campaign.

    "It was shortly after the election, that President-elect Trump directed Flynn to contact Russian officials on topics that included working jointly against ISIS," ABC News said.


http://money.cnn.com/2017/12/01/media/abc-news-flynn-correction/index.html
    ABC News corrects bombshell Flynn report

    ABC News on Friday evening corrected an explosive special report that aired in the morning saying that Donald Trump, as a candidate for president, had asked Michael Flynn to make contact with Russians.

    During "World News Tonight," ABC News investigative reporter Brian Ross said the source who had provided the initial information for his story later told him that it was as president-elect, not as a candidate, that Trump asked Flynn to contact the Russians.

    The initial report, based on one anonymous source, prompted a dramatic reaction in the financial markets, and the Dow fell more than 350 points.

    Stocks largely recovered later in the day.

    The sharp slide in the stock market came within minutes of an ABC News report that Flynn is prepared to testify that Trump directed him to make contact with Russians. 

    ...Several hours later, a spokesperson for the network told CNN that Ross would be issuing a "clarification" on "World News Tonight," which airs at 6:30 p.m. ET.

    "[A] clarification tonight on something one of Flynn's confidants told us and we reported earlier today," Ross said on the program. "He said the president had asked Flynn to contact Russia during the campaign. He's now clarifying that saying, according to Flynn, candidate Trump asked him during the campaign to find ways to repair relations with Russia and other world hot spots. And then after the election, the president-elect asked him to contact Russia on issues including working together to fight ISIS." 


https://www.politico.com/story/2017/12/01/abc-news-flynn-plea-clarification-conservatives-275981
    ABC News draws fire for erroneous Trump-Flynn report

    The network corrected its faulty report, which drew widespread criticism and a skewering from conservative commentators about 'fake news.'

    ...The report also came under heavy scrutiny by reporters from other mainstream news outlets.

    "This is a big distinction. Market tanked when ABC News report dropped," CNN media reporter Oliver Darcy wrote of the distinction between the original and emended reports.


https://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/erik-wemple/wp/2017/12/04/why-suspend-abc-newss-brian-ross-over-michael-flynn-mistake/
    The mistake jolted the United States, with an accent on financial markets. Relying on a “confidant,” Ross reported that Michael Flynn, the fired national security adviser to President Trump, was prepared to testify that Trump had directed him to contact the Russians while he was a presidential candidate. That, of course, would have been a huge revelation for the “collusion” story. Alas, it wasn’t true. On the evening news, Ross issued a “clarification” stating that the directive had taken place during the presidential transition — not so scandalous.


On top of that, a lot of the reports on Flynn's plea deal have misleading headlines:


http://abcnews.go.com/US/senior-trump-transition-official-directed-flynn-contact-russia/story?id=51515179
    Jared Kushner is 'very senior' official who directed Flynn to contact Russia in court documents: Sources


https://www.bloomberg.com/view/articles/2017-12-01/kushner-is-said-to-have-ordered-flynn-to-contact-russia
    Kushner Is Said to Have Ordered Flynn to Contact Russia


http://time.com/5046089/jared-kushner-michael-flynn-senior-official/
    Jared Kushner Directed Michael Flynn to Contact Russian Government, Source Says


https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2017-12-01/kushner-is-said-to-have-asked-flynn-to-contact-russian-envoy
    Kushner Asked Flynn to Contact Russian Ambassador, Sources Say


http://thehill.com/policy/national-security/362834-kushner-is-senior-trump-transition-official-who-ordered-flynn-to
    Kushner is senior transition official who ordered Flynn to contact Russia: reports


https://www.thedailybeast.com/very-senior-trump-official-authorized-flynns-russia-outreach
    ‘Very Senior’ Trump Official Authorized Flynn’s Russia Outreach

    Every phone call he had with Russian officials during the transition was made with the blessing of the team headed by Mike Pence. What was the vice president’s role?


They give the impression that Kushner was the one behind Flynn's infamous calls, but Kushner only directed Flynn to ask the Russian ambassador to delay or defeat a U.N. vote on Israeli settlements. If you didn't read carefully, you'd get the impression that the calls happened without Trump's involvement.

These anomalies are hard to explain. The media knows the implications of Trump directing Flynn's calls, but multiple supposedly independent media outlets are instead downplaying and misleading people about a key piece of information in scandal that could bring down the President of the United States.

If we want politicians who are accountable to us instead of a foreign power, we have to deter foreign influence in our elections. If that doesn't work, and a politician tries to help a foreign power get away with meddling in our elections on his or her behalf, then that politician must face consequences. Our media is failing us on both counts.




------





------


www.cnn.com/2017/02/10/politics/flynn-russia-us-sanctions-reports/
	Trump says he's unaware of reports Flynn discussed sanctions with Russian ambassador
 
	Updated 7:22 PM ET, Fri February 10, 2017
 
	President Donald Trump said Friday afternoon he was unaware of reports that his national security adviser, Michael Flynn, may have spoken about sanctions with the Russian ambassador before the inauguration.

	Trump, speaking to reporters aboard Air Force One, said he will "look into that."


Trump says he was unaware Flynn discussed sanctions, even after Yates warned the WH about Flynn?


http://www.pbs.org/newshour/rundown/read-james-comeys-prepared-statement-thursdays-senate-hearing/
	February 14 Oval Office Meeting

	...the President began by saying, “I want to talk about Mike Flynn.” Flynn had resigned the previous day. The President began by saying Flynn hadn’t done anything wrong in speaking with the Russians, but he had to let him go because he had misled the Vice President. He added that he had other concerns about Flynn, which he did not then specify.

	...The President then returned to the topic of Mike Flynn, saying, “He is a good guy and has been through a lot.” He repeated that Flynn hadn’t done anything wrong on his calls with the Russians, but had misled the Vice President. He then said,


Trump insists Flynn didn't do anything wrong in his conversations with the Russians, but is guilty of lying


http://www.latimes.com/politics/la-na-pol-trump-news-conference-transcript-20170216-story.html
	FEBRUARY 16, 2017, 2:55 PM
 
	Russia is fake news. Russia -- this is fake news put out by the media. The real news is the fact that people, probably from the Obama administration because they're there, because we have our new people going in place, right now.
 

	...QUESTION: Did you direct Mike Flynn to discuss sanctions with the Russian ambassador --
 
	TRUMP: No, I didn't.
 
	QUESTION: -- prior to your --
 
	TRUMP: No, I didn't.
 
	QUESTION: -- inauguration.
 
	TRUMP: No, I didn't.
 
	QUESTION: And then fired him --
 
	TRUMP: Excuse me.


-----



https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/trump-lawyer-says-president-knew-flynn-had-given-fbi-the-same-account-he-gave-to-vice-president/2017/12/03/5c59a620-d849-11e7-a841-2066faf731ef_story.html
	Yates did tell McGahn that she was concerned about Flynn’s underlying conduct — the calls with the Russian ambassador and the fact that he was not telling the truth to the vice president, according to officials who spoke to The Post in February.

	Yates offered to show McGahn the underlying evidence regarding the phone calls, and she said the FBI could pull the material together for him to see, the officials said.

	McGahn was told Jan. 30 that the material was ready for his review, the officials said. On that night, Trump fired Yates over her refusal to defend his travel ban.

	A person familiar with McGahn’s account says the White House counsel did not give Trump any indication in January that Flynn had violated the law in his FBI interview or tell the president that he believed Flynn was under criminal investigation.



https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/post-politics/wp/2017/05/08/full-transcript-sally-yates-and-james-clapper-testify-on-russian-election-interference/
	BLUMENTHAL: Did you tell Donald McGahn that then-National Security Adviser Flynn told the truth to the FBI?

	YATES: No, he asked me how he had done in the interview, and I specifically declined to answer that.

	BLUMENTHAL: Because it was part of an investigation?

	YATES: That's right.

	BLUMENTHAL: Was that intended to indicate to him that Michael Flynn had a problem in that interview?

	YATES: No, I was intending to let him know that Michael Flynn had a problem on a lot of levels, but it wasn't necessarily with respect to how he performed in the interview. I was intentionally not letting him know how the interview had gone.


------


http://www.cnn.com/2017/06/07/politics/james-comey-memos-testimony/index.html
	READ: James Comey's prepared testimony

	January 6 Briefing
 
	...I discussed with the FBI's leadership team whether I should be prepared to assure President-Elect Trump that we were not investigating him personally. ...During our one-on-one meeting at Trump Tower, based on President Elect Trump's reaction to the briefing and without him directly asking the question, I offered that assurance.


https://www.realclearpolitics.com/video/2017/05/11/president_trumps_full_interview_with_lester_holt.html
	HOLT: Let me ask you about your termination letter to Mr. Comey. You write, "I greatly appreciate you informing me on three separate occasions that I am not under investigation." Why did you put that in there?
 
	TRUMP: Because he told me that. I mean, he told me that.
 
	HOLT: He told you, you weren't under investigation with...
 
	TRUMP: Yeah, and I...
 
	HOLT: ...regard to the Russian investigation.
 
	TRUMP: ...I've heard that -- I've heard that from others. I think...
 
	HOLT: Was it in a phone call? Did you meet face to face?
 
	TRUMP: I had a dinner with him. He wanted to have dinner because he wanted to stay on. We had a very nice dinner at the White House...

	...And he wanted to stay on as the FBI head. And I said I'll, you know, consider. We'll see what happens.
 
	But we had a very nice dinner. And at that time, he told you are not under investigation...
 
	HOLT: That was...
 
	TRUMP: ...which I knew anyway.
 
	HOLT: That was one meeting. When was the -- when was the other two?
 
	TRUMP: First of all, when you're under investigation, you're giving all sorts of documents and everything. I knew I wasn't under. And I heard it was stated at the committee -- at some committee level that I wasn't, number one.
 
	HOLT: So, that didn't come directly from him.
 
	TRUMP: Then, during a phone call, he said it. And then, during another phone call he said it.
 
	So, he said it once at dinner and then he said it twice during phone calls.



https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/post-politics/wp/2017/05/08/full-transcript-sally-yates-and-james-clapper-testify-on-russian-election-interference/
	WHITEHOUSE: Did you discuss criminal prosecution of Mr. Flynn -- General Flynn?
 
	YATES: My recollection is that did not really come up much in the first meeting. It did come up in the second meeting, when Mr. McGahn called me back the next morning and asked the -- the morning after -- this is the morning of the 27th, now -- and asked me if I could come back to his office.
 
	And so I went back with the NSD official, and there were essentially four topics that he wanted to discuss there, and one of those topics was precisely that. He asked about the applicability of certain statutes, certain criminal statutes 




http://www.politico.com/story/2017/06/08/full-text-james-comey-trump-russia-testimony-239295
	SEN. SUSAN COLLINS: ...I want first to ask you about your conversations with the president, three conversations in which you told him that he was not under investigation. The first was during your January 6th meeting, according to your testimony, in which it appears that you actually volunteered that assurance. Is that correct?
 
	COMEY: That's correct.
 
	...COLLINS: Then on the January 27th dinner, you told the president that he should be careful about asking you to investigate because, “you might create a narrative that we are investigating him personally, which we weren't.”


------


http://www.latimes.com/politics/la-na-pol-trump-news-conference-transcript-20170216-story.html
	TRUMP: ...As far as the general's concerned, when I first heard about it, I said huh, that doesn't sound wrong. My counsel came, Don McGahn, White House Counsel, and he told me and I asked him, he can speak very well for himself. He said he doesn't think anything is wrong, you know, really didn't think.
 
	It was really, what happened after that but he didn't think anything was done wrong. I didn't either because I waited a period of time and I started to think about it, I said "well I don't see" -- to me, he was doing the job.
 
	The information was provided by -- who I don't know, Sally Yates. And I was a little surprised because I said "doesn't sound like he did anything wrong there." 



https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/post-politics/wp/2017/05/08/full-transcript-sally-yates-and-james-clapper-testify-on-russian-election-interference/
	YATES: ...And we walked the White House Counsel who also had an associate there with him through General Flynn's underlying conduct, the contents of which I obviously cannot go through with you today because it's classified. But we took him through in a fair amount of detail of the underlying conduct, what General Flynn had done, and then we walked through the various press accounts and how it had been falsely reported.

	We also told the White House Counsel that General Flynn had been interviewed by the FBI on February 24. Mr. McGahn asked me how he did and I declined to give him an answer to that. And we then walked through with Mr. McGahn essentially why we were telling them about this and the first thing we did was to explain to Mr. McGahn that the underlying conduct that General Flynn had engaged in was problematic in and of itself.


http://www.latimes.com/politics/la-na-pol-trump-news-conference-transcript-20170216-story.html
	TRUMP: ...That was very normal. You know, first everybody got excited because they thought he did something wrong. After they thought about it, it turned out he was just doing his job. So -- and I do. And by the way, with all of that being said, I do think he's a fine man.



------

https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/post-politics/wp/2017/05/08/full-transcript-sally-yates-and-james-clapper-testify-on-russian-election-interference/
	WHITEHOUSE: Following the Comey line, the director testified a few days ago in the full committee that the FBI had interviewed Mr. Flynn a day before, or two days before, your meeting at the White House, and you've just testified that you had told the White House counsel that the FBI had interviewed Flynn and he'd asked -- McGahn had asked, how'd he do?
 
	YATES: Right.
 
	...WHITEHOUSE: Do you know where that interview took place or under what circumstances?
 
	YATES: I believe it took place at the White House.
 
	WHITEHOUSE: The Flynn interview?
 
	YATES: Yes.
 
	WHITEHOUSE: OK. Do you know if Flynn was represented by council at the time?
 
	YATES: I don't believe he was.
 
	...YATES: ...The FBI had conducted the interview on the 24th. We got a readout from the FBI on the 25th, a detailed readout specifically from the agents that had conducted the interview.
 
 
https://twitter.com/realdonaldtrump/status/824083821889015809
	Big day planned on NATIONAL SECURITY tomorrow. Among many other things, we will build the wall!
	6:37 PM - 24 Jan 2017
 
 
http://www.cnbc.com/2017/01/24/trump-to-restrict-immigration-from-several-middle-east-countries-reuters.html
	Trump expected to sign executive orders on immigration
	Tuesday, 24 Jan 2017 | 9:17 PM ET
 
	 U.S. President Donald Trump is expected to sign several executive orders on Wednesday restricting immigration from Syria and six other Middle Eastern or African countries, according to several congressional aides and immigration experts briefed on the matter.
 
	In addition to Syria, Trump's orders are expected to temporarily restrict access to the United States for most refugees. Another order will block visas from being issued to those from Iraq, Iran, Libya, Somalia, Sudan and Yemen, said the aides and experts, who asked not to be identified.
 
	The restrictions on refugees are likely to include a multi-month ban on admissions from all countries until the State Department and the Department of Homeland Security can make the vetting process more rigorous.



------


http://www.newsweek.com/russias-lavrov-warns-master-deal-trump-putin-can-negotiate-too-548513
	Russia’s Lavrov Warns ‘Master of Deal’ Trump That Putin Is More Than a Match at Negotiating Table
	By Damien Sharkov On 1/26/17 at 11:03 AM
 
	Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov has told parliament in his home country that although Donald Trump boasts of being a “master of the deal,” Russia’s own leader is also no slouch in getting the best results for Russia.
 
	Lavrov spoke in the lower house of parliament Thursday, referring to Donald Trump’s speech at his presidential inauguration last week, when he declared his prime policy would be “America first.” While Putin and Trump have voiced a willingness to improve their countries’ relationship, they are yet to settle on a date for a meeting.
 
 
http://thehill.com/blogs/blog-briefing-room/news/316382-petition-demanding-trumps-tax-returns-gets-record-number-of
	Petition for Trump’s tax returns gets record number of signatures
	By Max Greenwood - 01/26/17 04:59 PM EST
 
 
http://www.nbcnews.com/politics/white-house/trump-putin-speak-phone-weekend-n712851
	Jan 27 2017, 12:36 am ET
	Trump and Putin to Speak by Phone This Weekend
 
	President Donald Trump will speak with Russian President Vladimir Putin by phone this weekend, an administration official familiar with the planning said.
 
	The planned phone call appears to be the first conversation between the two leaders since Trump was inaugurated as the nation’s 45th president last Friday. 

http://www.cnn.com/2017/01/27/politics/trump-putin-call-russia-sanctions/index.html
	Trump says he might not like Putin once he gets to know him
 
	Updated 9:10 PM ET, Fri January 27, 2017
 
	President Donald Trump said Friday it was "too early" to start discussing lifting sanctions on Russia, whose leader he will speak with Saturday, though he indicated his interest in warmer ties.
 
	Earlier Friday, though, top Trump adviser Kellyanne Conway told Fox News that lifting US sanctions on Russia would be up for discussion when the two countries' leaders talk.
 
	"All of that is under consideration," Conway said when asked specifically whether lifting sanctions approved by the Obama administration would be considered.
 
	Friday night, however, a senior administration official said the current plan was not to lift the Russian sanctions.
 
	Saturday's phone call will be the first phone conversation between Trump and Russian President Vladimir Putin since the inauguration. Vice President Mike Pence also will join the call.
 
	"I hear a call was set up and we will see what happens," Trump said regarding sanctions during a White House news conference.
 
	"We're looking to have a great relationship with all countries," Trump added. "If we can have a great relationship with Russia and China and all countries, I'm all for that."
 
	He added, "How the relationship works out, I won't be able to tell you that (until) later. I've had many times where I thought I'd get along with people and I don't like them at all."
 
	Trump also said there was "no guarantee" on a path forward.
 
	The President said he hopes to have a good rapport with Putin but that it was possible they would be adversaries.
 
	"I hope we have a fantastic relationship. That's possible, and it's also possible that we won't. We will see what happens," he said.
 
	Obama imposed sanctions on Russia throughout his eight years as president and earlier this month expelled 35 Russian diplomats from the United States for alleged Russian interference in the 2016 election.


------

http://www.christianpost.com/news/trump-to-prioritize-persecuted-christians-as-refugees-173681/
	Trump to Prioritize Persecuted Christians as Refugees
 
	By Anugrah Kumar , Christian Post Contributor
	Jan 28, 2017
 
	President Donald Trump signed new orders to "keep radical Islamic terrorists out of the United States of America" and pledged to give priority to persecuted Christians as refugees.
 
	"We are going to help them (persecuted Christians). They've been horribly treated," Trump told CBN News Friday, the day he signed new orders to tighten America's refugee and visa policies.
 
	"Do you know if you were a Christian in Syria it was impossible, at least very tough to get into the United States? If you were a Muslim you could come in, but if you were a Christian, it was almost impossible and the reason that was so unfair, everybody was persecuted in all fairness, but they were chopping off the heads of everybody but more so the Christians. And I thought it was very, very unfair," Trump continued in the interview with The Brody File, which will be aired Sunday.
 
	...The newswire says President Trump also plans to suspend issuing visas for people from the predominantly Muslim countries of Iran, Iraq, Libya, Somalia, Sudan, Syria and Yemen for at least 30 days.
 
	...some Christian groups have expressed dismay at Trump's plans to curb refugee resettlement.
 
 
http://www.cnn.com/2017/01/30/politics/trump-travel-ban-q-and-a/
	This is the "extreme vetting" Trump promised during the campaign, but it still seems to have caught folks by surprise.
 
	Team Trump apparently never ran the order by officials at the Justice Department. Homeland Security officials weren't given much guidance about how the order would be implemented or enforced. Thus the confusion and chaos.
 
	The ban snared green card holders and people with valid visas alike. Some travelers who were in the air when Trump signed the order weren't able to enter the country when they landed. Some were detained. Others were sent back to where they flew in from. Lawsuits began to fly and by Saturday night a federal judge had temporarily and partially blocked Trump's order.
 
	How big is the backlash?
 
	It's global. Hundreds showed up at airports across the country -- from New York to Atlanta to Dallas to Seattle -- to protest. Vocal crowds against the order gathered outside the White House.
 
	...There's panic in some US colleges and universities that have a large number of foreign students. Some students and faculty members fear they'll have to decide between careers or families. Some raced back to the United States as the executive order loomed, so they would be able to complete a degree. Now they're left to wonder when they'll get to see their families again if they remain in the United States.
 
	...There's hardship for those who planned to come to the States as well. Mahmoud Hassan, an 18-year-old Syrian in Damascus, accepted an offer to attend MIT earlier this year, but because of the ban, he said his "dreams are basically ruined."
 
 
https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/post-politics/wp/2017/05/08/full-transcript-sally-yates-and-james-clapper-testify-on-russian-election-interference/
	KLOBUCHAR: And during that meeting did they mention -- anyone mention that this refugee order was about to come out?
 
	...YATES: No and that was one thing that was of concern to us, is that not only was department leadership not consulted here and beyond department leadership, really the subject matter experts, the national security experts, not only was the department not consulted, we weren't even told about it. I learned about this from media reports.
 
	KLOBUCHAR: So you learned about it after the meeting at the White house Council from the media.
 
	YATES: Right.
 
 
https://www.usatoday.com/story/news/politics/2017/01/28/trump-moves-past-day-refugee-ban-putin-more-executive-orders/97181992/
	Immigration ban fallout: What you need to know
	Published 11:05 a.m. ET Jan. 28, 2017
 
	...Judge grants emergency stay for those in limbo after immigration ban
 
	...Protests ramp up at airports across USA
 
	...Lawsuits also on the rise
 
	...Dozens detained at U.S. airports, other stranded abroad
 
	...Iran retaliates, Canada opens arms after Trump immigration ban
 
	...Trump: Immigration ban working 'nicely’
 
	...Refugee fallout around the USA
 
	...Advocacy group flooded with 1,000 calls amid 'complete chaos'
 
	...Kremlin: Trump, Putin agree to coordinate on fighting Islamic State
 
	...Iranian filmmaker Asghar Farhadi can't go to Oscars
 
	...Travel uncertainty for tens of thousands
 
	...Shockwaves felt through tech industry
 
 
http://thehill.com/homenews/administration/316726-giuliani-trump-asked-me-how-to-do-a-muslim-ban-legally
	Giuliani: Trump asked me how to do a Muslim ban 'legally'
 
	By Rebecca Savransky - 01/29/17 08:48 AM EST
 
	Former New York City Mayor Rudy Giuliani (R) said in an interview on Saturday that President Trump had previously asked him about legally implementing a "Muslim ban."
 
	But Giuliani then disputed the notion that the president's sweeping executive order barring refugees and people from seven predominantly Muslim nations amounts to a ban on Muslims.
 
	"I’ll tell you the whole history of it: When he first announced it, he said ‘Muslim ban,'" Giuliani said on Fox News.
 
	"He called me up, he said, ‘Put a commission together, show me the right way to do it legally.’"
 
	Giuliani said he then put together a commission that included lawmakers and expert lawyers.
 
	"And what we did was we focused on, instead of religion, danger," Giuliani said.
 
	"The areas of the world that create danger for us, which is a factual basis, not a religious basis. Perfectly legal, perfectly sensible."
 
 
http://www.cnn.com/2017/01/28/politics/2-iraqis-file-lawsuit-after-being-detained-in-ny-due-to-travel-ban/
	Judges temporarily block part of Trump's immigration order, WH stands by it
 
 
dhttps://www.washingtonpost.com/news/the-fix/wp/2017/01/29/president-trumps-travel-ban-is-causing-chaos-dont-expect-him-to-back-down/
	A federal judge in New York blocked deportations nationwide late Saturday of those detained on entry to the United States after an executive order from President Trump targeted citizens from seven predominantly Muslim countries.
 
	Judge Ann Donnelly of the U.S. District Court in Brooklyn granted a request from the American Civil Liberties Union to stop the deportations after determining that the risk of injury to those detained by being returned to their home countries necessitated the decision.
 
 
https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2017/01/30/us/document-Letter-From-Sally-Yates.html
	Letter From Sally Yates
 
	Jan 30, 2017
 
	...Its review does not take account of statements made by an administration or its surrogates close in time to the issuance of an Executive Order that may bear on the order's purpose.
 
	...I am not convinced that the defense of the Executive Order is consistent with these responsibilities nor am I convinced that the Executive Order is lawful.
 
 
https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/post-politics/wp/2017/05/08/full-transcript-sally-yates-and-james-clapper-testify-on-russian-election-interference/
	YATES: Right, so that that would not have a negative impact on the FBI investigation at that point.
 
	And there was a request made by Mr. McGahn, in the second meeting as to whether or not they would be able to look at the underlying evidence that we had that we had described for him of General Flynn's conduct. And we told him that we were inclined to allow them to look at that underlying evidence, that we wanted to go back to DOJ and be able to make the logistical arrangements for that.
 
	...YATES: Two meetings and then a phone call at the end to let him know...
 
	WHITEHOUSE: That the material was available if he wanted to see it.
 
	YATES: ... that the material was available. He had to call me back. He was not available then and I did not hear back from him until that afternoon of Monday the 30th.
 
	WHITEHOUSE: And that was the end of this episode, nobody came over to look at the material?
 
	YATES: I don't know what happened after that because that was my last day with DOJ.
 
 
https://www.bostonglobe.com/news/politics/2017/01/30/read-full-white-house-statement-sally-yates/HkFReIYJidU9deDelPK6SM/story.html
	January 31, 2017
 
	 The White House has fired acting Attorney General Sally Yates, a Democratic appointee, after she directed Justice Department attorneys not to defend President Donald Trump’s controversial executive refugee and immigration ban.
 
	The following is the full White House statement:
 
	“The acting Attorney General, Sally Yates, has betrayed the Department of Justice by refusing to enforce a legal order designed to protect the citizens of the United States. This order was approved as to form and legality by the Department of Justice Office of Legal Counsel.
 
	Ms. Yates is an Obama Administration appointee who is weak on borders and very weak on illegal immigration.
 
