



http://www.hawaii.edu/uhwo/clear/HonoluluRecord1/frankblog1949.html
	...September 22, 1949: Cold War In Church

	...The cold war policies of the bi-partisans, administered by their thought control police, are aimed against such Negroes as Paul Robeson, who think American democracy could learn about race relations from Russia


https://archive.org/details/TheSwordAndTheShield-TheMitrokhinArchiveAndTheSecretHistoryOfTheKGB
	To the Centre’s dismay, King repeatedly linked the aims of the civil rights movement not to the alleged worldwide struggle against American imperialism but to the fulfillment of the American dream and “the magnificent words of the Constitution and the Declaration of Independence.”

	...Having given up hope of influencing King, the Centre aimed instead at replacing him with a more radical and malleable leader. In August 1967 the Centre approved an operational plan by the deputy head of Service A, Yuri Modin, former controller of the Magnificent Five, to discredit King and his chief lieutenants by placing articles in the African press, which could then be reprinted in American newspapers, portraying King as an “Uncle Tom” who was secretly receiving government subsidies to tame the civil rights movement

	...The same operational plan also contained a series of active measures designed to discredit US policy “on the Negro issue.” The Centre authorized Modin ...To forge and distribute through illegal channels a document showing that the John Birch Society, in conjunction with the Minuteman organization, is developing a plan for the physical elimination of leading figures in the Negro movement in the US.

	...Service A sought to exploit the violent images of the long, hot summers which began in August 1965 with race riots in Watts, the black Los Angeles ghetto, which resulted in thirty-six deaths, left 1,032 injured and caused damage estimated at over 40 million dollars. The Centre seems to have hoped that as violence intensified King would be swept aside by black radicals such as Stokeley Carmichael, who told a meeting of Third World revolutionaries in Cuba in the summer of 1967, “We have a common enemy. Our struggle is to overthrow this system ... We are moving into open guerrilla warfare in the United States.”

	...King’s assassination on April 4, 1968 was quickly followed by the violence and rioting which the KGB had earlier blamed King for trying to prevent. Within a week riots had erupted in over a hundred cities, forty-six people had been killed, 3,500 injured and 20,000 arrested. To “Deke” DeLoach, it seemed that, “The nation was teetering on the brink of anarchy.” 86 Henceforth, instead of dismissing King as an Uncle Tom, Service A portrayed him as a martyr of the black liberation movement and spread conspiracy theories alleging that his murder had been planned by white racists with the connivance of the authorities.

	...Simultaneously the Centre implemented a series of active measures designed to weaken the internal cohesion of the United States and undermine its international reputation by inciting race hatred. In 1971 Andropov personally approved the fabrication of pamphlets full of racist insults purporting to come from the extremist Jewish Defense League, headed by Meir Kahane, calling for a campaign against the “black mongrels” who, it was claimed, were attacking Jews and looting Jewish shops. Thirty pamphlets were mailed to a series of militant black groups in the hope of producing “mass disorders in New York.” At the same time forged letters were sent to sixty black organizations giving fictitious details of atrocities committed by the League against blacks and calling for vengeance against Kahane and his chief lieutenants.

	...On at least one occasion, the Centre ordered the use of explosives to exacerbate racial tensions in New York. On July 25, 1971 the head of the FCD First (North American) Department, Anatoli Tikhonovich Kireyev, instructed the New York residency to proceed with operation PANDORA: the planting of a delayed-action explosive package in “the Negro section of New York.” Kireyev’s preferred target was “one of the Negro colleges.” After the explosion the residency was ordered to make anonymous telephone calls to two or three black organizations, claiming that the explosion was the work of the Jewish Defense League.


https://www.theatlantic.com/international/archive/2013/03/how-stalin-created-some-of-the-post-soviet-worlds-worst-ethnic-conflicts/273649/
	How Stalin Created Some of the Post-Soviet World's Worst Ethnic Conflicts

	Eighty-one-year-old Nikolai Khasig was born in Sukhumi in 1932. It was just one year after Soviet dictator Josef Stalin stripped Abkhazia of its short-lived status as a full-fledged republic of the USSR and made it a region of Soviet Georgia.

	At the end of 1936, Lavrenty Beria -- at that time the head of the Transcaucasia region and later the sadistic head of Stalin's secret police -- invited the popular Abkhaz leader Nestor Lakoba to dinner at his house in Tbilisi. Lakoba died suddenly -- officially, of a heart attack, but it was widely believed that the former revolutionary comrade of Stalin's had been poisoned.

	In the repressions that began in 1937, the entire Abkhaz government was arrested and subjected to show trials. Soviet archives later revealed that Beria had ordered them all executed before the trials even began. Collectivization came to Abkhazia with a vengeance. Soviet publications began arguing that the Abkhaz were actually of Georgian origin in the first place.

	"Such violence, such humiliation, such abuse, such genocide," Khasig recalls. "Our people never experienced such things before."

	... "In 1945, after the end of the war, Abkhaz schools were shut down and the policy of forced assimilation was begun," he says. "Our children -- we ourselves -- studied in the Georgian language and didn't know a single word [of Abkhaz]. We were simply cut off."

	When the Soviet Union collapsed in 1991, all this old resentment and more surged to the surface.

	In 1992, war broke out in Abkhazia -- with Abkhaz separatists joined in their struggle by representatives of other aggrieved Caucasus nations such as Chechens, Circassians, Ossetians, and Cossacks.

	The Abkhaz were also actively supported by the Russian military. An estimated 8,000 people were killed and as many as 240,000 ethnic Georgians were displaced.

	...The guns of war flared elsewhere as well in the former Soviet Union in the early 1990s. And these similar ethnic conflicts, many of which were exacerbated by Soviet polices six decades earlier, have come to be called "Stalin's time bombs."

	Such conflicts, spanning from Central Europe to the intricate patchwork of exclaves that comprises the borders of Central Asia, are in many ways direct legacies of the shifting nationalities policies that were often brutally implemented during the nearly 30 years that Stalin towered over the Soviet Union.

	These disputed places include the disputed ethnic-Armenian region of Azerbaijan called Nagorno-Karabakh, Russia's North Caucasus republic of Chechnya, its neighboring republics, and the breakaway Moldovan region of Transdniester.

	From bizarre border policies and the wholesale deportation of ethnic groups to the mass importation of ethnic Russians to various regions, Stalin's policies created or aggravated conflicts that remain central to understanding Eurasia today. 


https://archive.org/details/TheWorldWasGoingOurWayTheKGBAndTheBattleForTheTheThirdWorld
	After the liberation of Ukraine, he returned with the Institute to Kharkov. His memories of the brutal punishment of many thousands of ‘anti-Soviet’ Ukrainians sometimes gave him nightmares in later life.


http://www.bbc.com/news/world-europe-25058256
	But the pain of the Holodomor comes not only from the unfathomable number of dead. Many people believe the causes were man-made and intentional. A genocide.

	They say that Joseph Stalin wanted to starve into submission the rebellious Ukrainian peasantry and force them into collective farms.

	The Kremlin requisitioned more grain than farmers could provide. When they resisted, brigades of Communist Party activists swept through the villages and took everything that was edible.

	"The brigades took all the wheat, barley - everything - so we had nothing left," says Ms Karpenko. "Even beans that people had set aside just in case.

	"The brigades crawled everywhere and took everything. People had nothing left to do but die."

	Genocide row

	As the hunger mounted, Soviet authorities took extra measures, such as closing off Ukraine's borders, so that peasants could not travel abroad and obtain food. This amounted to a death sentence, experts say.

	"The government did everything it could to prevent peasants from entering other regions and looking for bread," says Oleksandra Monetova, from Kiev's Holodomor Memorial Museum. 

	...Mr Baley, an American composer who was born in Ukraine, supports efforts to have the Holodomor recognised internationally as genocide.

	"You have to admit that it was done, if you want to have any kind of human progress," he says. "You can't wrap it up and say that it wasn't."



------


http://www.hawaii.edu/uhwo/clear/HonoluluRecord1/frankblog1949.html
	...September 29, 1949: Challenge to the Church

	..."Whatever your differences and mine may be with Soviet Russia, we must recognize the difference between the Communist attack on religion and the fascist attack. The Communist attack is intellectual, philosophical, critical and harmless, practically speaking."


https://archive.org/details/TheSwordAndTheShield-TheMitrokhinArchiveAndTheSecretHistoryOfTheKGB
	...As well as giving higher priority to operations against the Vatican, Andropov also stepped up the persecution of the Ukrainian Uniates. In 1969 the head of the underground church, Bishop Velychkovsky, was arrested and sentenced to three years’ imprisonment. The KGB reported that his arrest “greatly helped to achieve a psychological breakthrough in the mind of SERAFIM,” another leading figure in the Uniate underground, who was recruited as a KGB agent. According to Mitrokhin’s notes on his file:

		SERAFIM explained in detail by whom, when and in what circumstances he was tasked to direct monks illegally; he reported incidents of criminal organizational activity by Bishop Velychkovsky and his close contacts; he reported on the situation among underground orders of monks . . . and he drew up a list of Uniate priests operating illegally. SERAFIM’S answers were recorded covertly on tape.

	Though SERAFIM agreed to “cooperate secretly” with the KGB, he refused to sign the written undertaking required of most informers. His controller did not insist, on the grounds that it would represent too great “a psychological trial for a man of religion” and leave him in fear of “divine punishment in the next world.” Another agent, terrified of “being cast into Hell,” had once begged the controller, on bended knee, to return his signed undertaking.


------



http://www.hawaii.edu/uhwo/clear/HonoluluRecord1/frankblog1950.html
	...January 12, 1950: Africa is Next Door

	...The empires of Western Europe are fighting as never before to retain a stranglehold on Africa. It is essential for the success of any war with Russia. Yet freedom for Africa is vital to freedom for all Asia; England, France and The Netherlands can get the wealth and raw materials to carry on warfare against liberation of their Asiatic colonies as long as they can exploit Africa. American Big Business prospers by controlling the imperialist cliques of Western Europe; the Atlantic Pact throws our armed might behind the empires as they attempt to crush independence movements within the colonies. And all of this continuation of virtual slavery is justified under the guise of a holy war to contain "Russian communism."

	...At the same time, the fire of liberation burns brighter among Africans with each success of Asiatic people to obtain self-government—thus further indicating the real closeness of Asia and Africa. And England, France, Belgium and the others are worried. So they bring out the usual cry of communism—sometimes with unexpected results.

	For instance, the 2.000,000 whites who rule South Africa have 147 members of parliament but permit only three for the 8,000,000 Negroes—and these three must be white. Last year the Negroes elected two representatives. Both are Communists. According to the Rev. R. W. Stopford, an educational leader in Africa, the natives are attracted by the fact that Russia has virtually abolished illiteracy and has ended discrimination against [sic] colored peoples.


https://archive.org/details/TheWorldWasGoingOurWayTheKGBAndTheBattleForTheTheThirdWorld
	During the mid- 1920s African and American blacks began to study in Moscow’s secret Comintern-run International Lenin School (MLSh) and Communist University of the Toilers of the East (KUTV). All were given false identities during their time in Moscow and their curriculum, like that of the other students, included training in underground work, espionage and guerrilla warfare. The Comintern leadership, however, had low expectations of all but the South Africans. Like other Soviet leaders, Grigori Zinoviev, the Comintern Chairman, knew little about black Africa. When he came to lecture at the KUTV in 1926, an Ashanti student from the Gold Coast, Bankole Awanoore-Renner, asked him about ‘Comintern’s attitude toward the oppressed nations of Africa’. Zinoviev responded by talking in some detail about the problems of Morocco and Tunisia, but Awanoore-Renner complained that he said nothing about ‘the most oppressed people’ south of the Sahara. Though Zinoviev pleaded lack of information, Awanoore-Renner thought he detected the stench of racism. 

	In September 1932 mounting complaints of racism in Moscow by black African and American students led Comintern’s Executive Committee to appoint an investigative committee. In January 1933 Dmitri Manuilsky, who had succeeded Zinoviev as Comintern chief, came to the University to listen to their complaints, which included a letter complaining of the ‘derogatory portrayal of Negroes in the cultural institutions of the Soviet Union’ as ‘real monkeys’. The signatures included the name ‘James Joken’, the Moscow alias of Jomo Kenyatta, later the first leader of independent Kenya. For Kenyatta, as for many radical African students a generation later, life in the Soviet Union was a disillusioning experience.

	...The Soviet Union’s closest relationships with leaders of other newly independent African states were also short lived. Moscow’s main hopes of extending its influence in sub-Saharan Africa were initially centred on Ghana, which in 1957 became the first black African state to achieve independence under the charismatic leadership of Kwame Nkrumah, widely hailed as the prototype of the new educated African statesman committed to both democracy and socialism. Once in power, however, Nkrumah’s rhetoric of liberation was rapidly contradicted by his intolerance of dissent. Though he claimed to be creating a specifically African brand of socialism rather than subscribing to Marxism-Leninism, his speeches became increasingly pro-Soviet. As he and his sycophantic supporters in the Convention People’s Party (CPP) transformed Ghana into a corrupt one-party state, Soviet and East German military, security and technical advisers arrived in increasing numbers. A KGB-trained National Security Service oversaw a huge network of informers. According to a Ghanaian white paper published after Nkrumah’s overthrow: ‘Nkrumah’s security officers, both men and women, were placed everywhere - in factories, offices, drinking bars, political rallies and even in churches, not forgetting the taxi drivers, bus drivers, shop assistants, peddlers and seemingly unemployed persons who were all acting as informants.’ 

	...The most important lesson drawn by Nkrumah from his overthrow was ‘that independent African states must pursue a policy of all-out socialism if they are to survive’. That his host in Guinea, Sékou Touré, survived in power, however, was due not to ‘all-out socialism’ but to the pervasiveness of his reign of terror which left even the army too cowed to attempt a military coup. The prisoners brought from their homes in the early hours for interrogation at Camp Boiro and other prison camps constructed with assistance from the East German Stasi and the Czechoslovak StB were tortured until they confessed to the usually imaginary conspiracies with which Sékou Touré was obsessed. The KGB turned a blind eye to the horrors of the Guinean regime, preferring instead to exploit its leader’s paranoid tendencies by active measures designed to convince him that the CIA was plotting to overthrow him.



------


http://www.hawaii.edu/uhwo/clear/HonoluluRecord1/frankblog1950.html
	...May 18, 1950: Our New “Democratic” Partner

	I was brought up with a healthy respect for the word, democracy. And yet I have constantly found it used with the utmost cynicism on the home front; this loose usage has undoubtedly prepared the way for careless handling internationally.

	Thus we have the amazing spectacle of the foreign ministers of the United States, Great Britain and France formally, announcing that Western Germany is being brought in as a full fledged partner in the alliance of the "western democracies" against Russia.

	If there had been a sincere effort to democratize Western Germany, I would feel much better about it. But it is a known fact that many honest American officials have quit their posts in disgust over the way in which Western Germany is being handed back to the Nazis.


https://archive.org/details/TheSwordAndTheShield-TheMitrokhinArchiveAndTheSecretHistoryOfTheKGB
	THE FRG WAS a major target for KGB active measures as well as intelligence collection. The chief priority of both KGB and HVA influence operations during the 1950s and 1960s was to discredit as many West German politicians as possible as neo-Nazis and “revenge- seekers.”

	...The most celebrated West German target of the KGB and the HVA was Willy Brandt, codenamed POLYARNIK (“Polar”). 20 From the moment Brandt became Bürgermeister of Berlin in October 1957, he was the victim of a series of active measures operations designed first to discredit and then to blackmail him. Given Brandt’s heroic record of resistance to Hitler, it was plainly unrealistic to include him in the KGB’s list of neo-Nazi conspirators. Instead, by distorting his early career and war record, KGB and HVA active measures sought, at various times, to portray him as a Gestapo informer, an anti-German émigré, a collaborator with SIS and the CIA and even as a former Soviet agent.

	...Brandt quickly denounced the “blind terror” waged by the Communists, on Soviet instructions, against POUM and other left-wing heretics:

		The truth of the matter is: the Comintern is determined to destroy all forces that refuse to obey its orders. It is for this reason that the whole international labor movement must rise against it.

	Brandt in turn was, absurdly, denounced by the Communists as “an agent of Franco” and “a spy of the Gestapo.”

	...After Hitler’s invasion of the Soviet Union in June 1941, Brandt’s attitude to Moscow changed. ...Some, including Brandt, were now willing to cooperate with the Soviet Union to secure the defeat of Hitler.

	...Brandt’s overriding motive was to provide any information to all three members of the Grand Alliance which might contribute to the defeat of Hitler. In the case of the Soviet Union, he calculated accurately that his best channel of communication with Moscow was via the Stockholm residency.

	The first attempt to discredit Brandt after his election as Berlin Bürgermeister in 1957 was a lengthy operation carried out jointly by the KGB and HVA in 1958-9 to use tendentious versions of his wartime record and other fabrications to show him as an agent of British and American intelligence. But, as the file on the operation acknowledges, “This did not produce the desired result, and Brandt’s position as a politician was not undermined.” Wolf next proposed reviving the old slander that Brandt had been a Gestapo agent during his Norwegian exile, but the East German leadership ordered the plan to be aborted due to lack of credible evidence.


http://www.hawaii.edu/uhwo/clear/HonoluluRecord1/frankblog1950.html
	...Our denazification program was one of the big jokes of the 20th century. Apparently, it was offered as a sop to an American public still outraged by the horrors of the mass tortures at Dachau and Buchenwald, of the attempt to exterminate the whole Jewish people.

	But the public has gradually forgotten in five years. And as the memory of these atrocities faded, so did our denazification. Stalin has been built up as a greater menace than Hitler and tears have been shed over the "poor Nazis" who murdered tens of millions of human beings.

	...If Germany is to become our partner, let us insist that she get the cleansing promised but never seriously undertaken.


https://archive.org/details/TheSwordAndTheShield-TheMitrokhinArchiveAndTheSecretHistoryOfTheKGB
	...AMONG DEPARTMENT V’S most ambitious proposals for special actions during 1968 was an operation to distract Western opinion from the suppression of the Prague Spring by sabotaging a major oil pipeline, codenamed ZVENO (“Link”), near the Austrian end of Bodensee Lake, which was believed by the Centre to carry 10 million tons of oil a year between Italy and West Germany. By breaching the pipeline at the point where it crossed the Rhine canal, Department V calculated that it could pollute the Bodensee, and thus contaminate the main source of drinking water on the West German— Austrian frontier. To carry the explosive, the Vienna residency purchased four Western-manufactured 1-liter thermos flasks, as well as ten ballpoint pens—presumably to conceal the detonators. The scapegoats for the environmental disaster caused by the explosion were to be Italian extremists allegedly retaliating for acts of sabotage carried out by South Tyrol terrorists. ZVENO set the pattern for most Department V peacetime special actions: immensely laborious and detailed preparations, followed by a reluctant decision not to go ahead because of the political risks involved—in particular, the possibility that, despite all the precautions taken, the hand of the KGB might somehow be discovered. The operation was postponed several times, kept under review for a number of years and finally abandoned.






https://archive.org/details/TheWorldWasGoingOurWayTheKGBAndTheBattleForTheTheThirdWorld
	While in Brussels, Avni also began to be employed by Mossad, using his fluent German to pose as a German businessman and make contact with former Nazis. Late in 1953, Avni was offered both a full-time position in Mossad and the post of commercial attaché in Belgrade and Athens. It was agreed that during his next posting he would combine espionage for Mossad with work as commercial attaché, based chiefly in Belgrade, and thereafter move to a permanent position in Mossad. Once in Belgrade, Avni was assigned a new controller operating under diplomatic cover as first secretary at the Soviet embassy. Though he believed himself still to be working for the GRU, he had - without his knowledge - been transferred to the KGB with the codename CHEKH. His KGB file identifies him, while in Belgrade, as acting head of Mossad operations in West Germany and Greece.  Among the operations which he personally conducted for Mossad, using his cover as a German businessman, was to penetrate the ranks of the former Wehrmacht officers employed by Gamal Abdel Nasser, after his 1954 coup, as military advisers in Egypt.  In 1955-56 Avni supplied the KGB residency in Belgrade with the ciphers used by Mossad for communications with its Belgrade and Athens stations (probably enabling them to be decrypted), as well as details of Mossad personnel (probably both officers and agents) in France, Germany, Greece, Italy, Switzerland and Yugoslavia. As in Brussels, he gave his controller ‘everything I had’


------


http://www.hawaii.edu/uhwo/clear/HonoluluRecord1/frankblog1950.html
	April 6, 1950: Bridges Conviction

	I am not at all surprised at the conviction of Harry Bridges. Disappointed, yes, but not surprised. With the political atmosphere prevailing in my country today, I believe that President Truman or even Alfred Sloan of General Motors would be convicted of being Soviet spies if a way could be found to bring them to trial. And if Senator McCarthy keeps up his attacks, even that might happen.

	From the accounts in the local daily press, Judge Harris gave a surprisingly fair charge to the jury. In this, he partially redeemed himself for certain earlier tactics which put the whole defense in a bad light. But by the time the court charged the jury, the real damage had already been done. The one bright spot is that the jurors deliberated from Friday until Tuesday before reaching a verdict. Even the growing roar of the witch-hunters did not intimidate them into a speedy decision of guilt. In calmer times, I believe they would have freed Bridges


https://books.google.com/books?id=8TXhy5pl2A0C&pg=PA224
	In four different federal hearings, Bridges denied under oath that he wa a member of the CPUSA. In the files of the Comintern in Moscow, we found a list of CPUSA members elected to the Central Committee of the party in 1936; on that list is a Comrade Rossi, identified in an accompanying biography as the pseudonym of Harry Bridges.


https://books.google.com/books?id=IB_ShD9fTcsC&pg=PA47
	Another former Communist, Sam Diner, told the FBI that Eisler had acted in concert with Harry Bridges to stir up dock workers in the San Francisco strike of 1934 that paralyed the city.


http://www.sfgate.com/bayarea/article/Soviet-Spies-Cast-a-Wide-Net-in-S-F-Decoded-2973582.php
	Soviet Spies Cast a Wide Net in S.F. / Decoded messages reveal activities of KGB in the '40s

	...The messages, distributed last week by the NSA's Center for Cryptologic History, were coded by Soviet agents and telegraphed from San Francisco, Mexico City, New York and Washington to Moscow and vice versa.

	...Among the illegal activities in the Bay Area that Soviet agents engaged in were kidnapping Russians hiding here and sending them back to the Soviet Union, where they faced certain death; receiving and assisting clandestine Russian agents with faked American identities; spying on American officials; and recruiting Communists in California for intelligence work.

	...Another local figure who appears in the telegraph traffic, although the reference is fragmentary and unclear, is Harry Bridges, the longtime pro-Soviet head of the International Longshoremen's and Warehousemen's Union. 


https://www.wilsoncenter.org/sites/default/files/Venona-San%20Francisco-KGB.pdf
	San Francisco KGB Station -- Moscow Center Cables, 1943-46
	From: SAN FRANCISCO
	To: MOSCOW

	...Harry BRIDGES asked...

	...and William MACKEY[MAKKEJ], who is working on the loading of our  ships in PORTLAND under “UNCLE[DYaDYa].  [1 group unrecovered] “VITALIJ”[v]  for processing [OFORMLENIE] these people...


https://books.google.com/books?id=BabHjAEzkdwC&pg=PA311
	By Frank Marshall Davis

	...I also wrote to Harry Bridges, head of the ILWU, whom I had met at Lincoln School. He suggested I get in touch with Koji Ariyoshi, editor of the Honoulu Record, a newspaper that was generally similar to the Chicago Star.


https://books.google.com/books?id=ZqtEIBxAhMsC&pg=PA177
	edited by Steven C. Tracy

	...Davis was the editor until 1948 ...The editorial column "Frank-ly Speaking" began at The Chicago Star. The aim of this publication was to heal the rift between various groups and promote a policy of cooperation and unity between Russia and the United States.



------


http://www.hawaii.edu/uhwo/clear/HonoluluRecord1/frankblog1950.html
	...June 15, 1950: The Master Plot

	...The New York trials of the 11 Communist leaders, the Harry Bridges trial, the contempt action against the Hawaii 36 are but steps in a definite program which could mean jail within two years for those who dare to read progressive publications, and this includes the HONOLULU RECORD. The plotters are banking on the continued disinterest of the American public in their master drive to kill off all independent and progressive thought within our nation.

	It is a matter of public record that on Thursday, January 12, this year, one Raymond P. Whearty, acting assistant attorney general, revealed to the House Subcommittee on Appropriations that the Department of Justice is planning the arrest and trial of 21,105 persons who — now get this — appear to be acting in concert with Russian interests." This program, Whearty said, is expected to "come up about the fiscal year 1951."

	...To Get Non-Conformists

	"The bulk of the cases involve subversive activity as applied to individuals or organizations. By that I mean persons who are active members of the Communist party and similar organizations, or who appear to be acting in concert with Russian interests." 

	This should be plain enough for all to see. By the justice department's own admission, they are not after Communists only but anybody who happens to object to the policies at the moment of those in power. That would mean anybody who spoke for peace or who opposed the Atlantic Pact or who asked for a raise in pay. This could be interpreted as "appearing to act in concert with Russian interests." They plan to do this even without the passage of the Mundt-Ferguson bill.

	And if they can make charges stick against the 21,105 victims, then they will mop up on anybody else who has not been intimidated and who insists on the traditional right to express an opinion contrary to those sanctioned by the thought police. In other words, you! This timetable for American fascism can be destroyed if the people throw off their indifference and decide they will permit no further infringement upon their democratic rights as Americans. Let the people speak!


http://www.businessinsider.com/here-was-the-fbis-secret-plan-in-case-nuclear-war-broke-out-2015-1
    The United States government made extreme, top-secret plans for preserving national security in the event of a nuclear attack during the Cold War, according to documents recently released to transparency journalism organization MuckRock.
 
    The FBI created "Plan C" in 1956, the same year the Red Army shut down the Hungarian Revolution, and if activated, Plan C would have put the nation under martial law and allowed for nearly 13,000 people to be detained for having links to "subversive organizations."
 
    The FBI held a briefing with three top officials from every department to distribute papers outlining Plan C, which was later given to FBI field offices. The plan was ordered to be destroyed in July 1957.
 
    Although the plan was never released, MuckRock's memos from closed meetings with high-ranking officials give readers an idea of what could have happened. Plan C would have gone into effect "after a war has begun in which the U.S. is involved or may become involved and prior to an actual attack on the U.S. itself," according to the documents.
 
    Government organizations would decide which of their employees were essential and have them hide out in backup offices. Soviet embassies would be searched for weapons, radios and explosives. Up to 900 Soviet diplomats and couriers would be taken into custody.
 
    In an emergency, the government would also have activated a detention program that would have led to arrests for "individuals whose affiliations with subversive organizations are so pronounced that their continued liberty in the event of national emergency would present a serious threat," according to the documents.


https://spectator.org/34799_dreams-frank-marshall-davis/
	...the FBI placed [Frank Marshall Davis] on the federal government’s Security Index, which meant that he could be immediately detained or arrested in the event of a national emergency, such as a war between the United States and USSR.


------


https://books.google.com/books/about/Writings_of_Frank_Marshall_Davis.html
	Maybe we ought to get more savvy about the Communists anyway. A social system that can mold Russia from a huge weakling in twenty-five years to what is today the strongest and most united nation in Europe, a people who has borne the full brunt of the terrible Nazi war machine and has flung it back, must have something, fundamentally sound.

	You have probably noticed here at home that practically every social advance made under the Roosevelt regime has been labeled “Red.” You may have noticed also that practically everybody who yells, “Communist” is him-self anti-Negro or anti-labor


http://www.cnn.com/2016/03/30/us/black-privilege/index.html
	...David Horowitz, author of the book, "Black Skin Privilege and the American Dream," says blacks are still more privileged, though they lag behind other racial groups in varying categories. It's not white privilege that's preventing them from doing better, he says; it's their behavior, such as their inability to build more intact families.

	"The fact that white people are better off is not a privilege; it's earned," says Horowitz, founder of the David Horowitz Freedom Center, a think tank in Los Angeles created to combat "the efforts of the radical left and its Islamist allies to destroy American values."


------


https://books.google.com/books/about/Writings_of_Frank_Marshall_Davis.html
	...It’s not too early to consider the fate of Japan after her defeat, and what- ever plans are made will have to be worked out with the full approval of China as well as Russia, her neighbors, if there’s going to be any kind of real peace. No Anglo-American alliance is going to go in and run Japan in utter disregard of the wishes of the Soviet Union and the Chinese nation without inviting eventual disaster.


https://archive.org/details/TheWorldWasGoingOurWayTheKGBAndTheBattleForTheTheThirdWorld
	Japan’s defeat in the Pacific War in August 1945 was followed by an American military occupation which imposed on it a new democratic constitution. In September 1951 a peace treaty signed in the improbable setting of the San Francisco Opera House provided for the occupation to end in the following April. A US-Japanese Security Treaty signed on the same day, however, approved the maintenance of American military bases not merely to defend Japan from foreign attack and assist in maintaining the peace and security of the Far East but also, if requested by the Japanese government, to help ‘put down large-scale internal riots and disturbances in Japan, caused through instigation or intervention of an outside Power or Powers’. 3 The Soviet Union refused to sign the San Francisco peace treaty and condemned the security treaty. Its refusal to give up the four islands in the southern chain of the Kuriles north of Hokkaido (known in Japan as the ‘Northern Territories’), which it had occupied at the end of the war, made it impossible for the remainder of the century to conclude a peace treaty with Japan. A Soviet offer in 1956 to return the two southernmost islands (Shikotan and the Habomais) in return for a peace treaty on its own terms failed to break the deadlock and was later withdrawn.

	Throughout the Cold War one of the main priorities of the Tokyo residency’s active measures was to drive a wedge between Japan and the United States. Its first major opportunity came with the negotiation of a revised security treaty in January 1960. 5 A campaign against ratification of the treaty begun by the Japanese Socialist Party (JSP), the Japanese Communist Party (JCP), the Trades Union General Council (Sohyo) and the Student Federation (Zengakuren) turned into the biggest mass movement in Japanese political history. At the height of the protest in May and June 1960, several million people in Tokyo and the main cities took part in street demonstrations and work stoppages, attended meetings and signed petitions. There were brawls in the Diet and riots in the streets, during which a female Tokyo University student was trampled to death. 6 As usually happened with protest movements of which it approved, the KGB claimed excessive credit for it.

	...The Tokyo residency also made plans for peacetime acts of sabotage intended to damage US-Japanese relations. In Line F jargon each act of sabotage was termed a ‘lily’ (lilya), the explosive device a ‘bouquet’ (buket), the detonator a ‘little flower’ (tsvetok), the explosion of the device a ‘splash’ (zaplyv), and the saboteur the ‘gardener’ (sadovnik). Among the sabotage plans devised by Line F was operation VULKAN, an attack on the library of the American Cultural Center in Tokyo which was planned to coincide with demonstrations against the Vietnam War in October 1965. The illegal agent NOMOTO was to place a book bomb in a bookcase in the library shortly before it closed one evening, together with a detonator concealed in a pack of American cigarettes which was timed to go off in the early hours of the morning. In order to conceal the KGB’s hand in the operation, Service A was to prepare leaflets purporting to come from Japanese nationalist extremists calling for attacks on US property. The most dramatic scheme devised by Line F to cause a major crisis in US- Japanese relations was a 1969 plan to scatter radioactive material in Tokyo Bay in the expectation that it would be blamed on US nuclear submarines using the Yokosuka naval base and cause a national outcry. Though supported by the Tokyo resident, the plan was turned down by the Centre because of the difficulty of obtaining suitable radioactive material from the United States and the danger that the source of Soviet material might be detected. 18 Two years later KGB plans for ‘special actions’ were drastically scaled down after some of them were compromised by the defection in London of the Line F officer, Oleg Lyalin.



------


http://www.hawaii.edu/uhwo/clear/HonoluluRecord1/frankblog1949.html
	...September 29, 1949: Atom Bombs and Peace

	I think we have reached the point where the big question, the key question, the question which the thought control boys have decided is the test for "loyalty," has become merely so much empty rhetoric.

	Specifically, I refer to the many variations of this basic question: "Would you fight for the United States in the event of a war with Russia?"

	I say this is so much rhetoric, so many wasted words, because if there is a war between America and the Soviet Union, I, for one, will take a last fond glance at this beautiful world of ours and prepare to bid it goodbye forever. Not even life in Timbuktu could survive World War III.

	This has been removed from the realm of speculation to the real­ity of grim fact with the recent and reluctant admission by President Truman that the Soviets have the atom bomb. This means, simply, that an A-bomb cannot be dropped on Moscow or Siberia without expecting a return of the compliment at Washington, D. C., or California.

	I phrase it this way because the only talk I have heard of using such bombs came from high officials of the American Legion, former U. S. ambassadors and other top-ranking politicians. If there has been similar talk in the Kremlin, our espionage agents have not mentioned it in the daily press. Instead, the men of Moscow speak of peace—something which is officially interpreted by the White House as a "Communist plot."


http://www.nytimes.com/2003/03/05/world/new-study-supports-idea-stalin-was-poisoned.html
    New Study Supports Idea Stalin Was Poisoned

    By MICHAEL WINES

	Fifty years after Stalin died, felled by a brain hemorrhage at his dacha, an exhaustive study of long-secret Soviet records lends new weight to an old theory that he was actually poisoned, perhaps to avert a looming war with the United States.

	That war may well have been closer than anyone outside the Kremlin suspected at the time, say the authors of a new book based on the records.
	
    ...Why Stalin might have been killed is a less difficult question. Politburo members lived in fear of Stalin; beyond that, the book cites a previously secret report as evidence that Stalin was preparing to add a new dimension to the alleged American conspiracy known as the Doctors' Plot.

	That report -- an interrogation of a supposed American agent named Ivan I. Varfolomeyev, in 1951 -- indicated that the Kremlin was preparing to accuse the United States of a plot to destroy much of Moscow with a new nuclear weapon, then to launch an invasion of Soviet territory along the Chinese border.

	Mr. Varfolomeyev's fantastic plot was known in Soviet documents as "the plan of the internal blow." Stalin, the book states, had assigned the Varfolomeyev case highest priority, and was preparing to proceed with a public trial despite his underlings' fears that the charges were so unbelievable that they would make the Kremlin a global laughingstock.

	Mr. Naumov said in an interview today that that plan, combined with other Soviet military preparations in the Russian Far East at the time, strongly suggest that Stalin was preparing for a war along the United States' Pacific Coast. What remains unclear, he said, is whether he planned a first strike or whether the mushrooming conspiracy unfolding in Moscow was to serve as a provocation that would lead both sides to a flash point.

	"I am told that the only case when the two sides were on the verge of war was the Cuban crisis," in 1962, he said. "But I think this was the first case. And this first time that we were on the verge of war was even more dangerous," because the devastation of nuclear weapons was not yet an article of faith.

	Mr. Brent said he believes that fear of a nuclear holocaust could have led Beria and perhaps others at that final dinner to assent to Stalin's death.

	"No question -- they were afraid," he said. "But they knew that the direction Stalin was going in was one of fiercer and fiercer conflict with the U.S. This is what Khrushchev saw, and it is what Beria saw. And it scared them to death."

	The authors say that Stalin knew of his comrades' fears, citing as proof remarks at a December 1952 meeting of top Communist leaders in which Stalin began laying out the scope of the Doctors' Plot and the American threat to Soviet power.

	"Here, look at you -- blind men, kittens," the minutes record Stalin as saying. "You don't see the enemy. What will you do without me?"


------

http://www.hawaii.edu/uhwo/clear/HonoluluRecord1/frankblog1950.html
	...February 9: 1950: Onward with the Hydrogen Bomb

	...Temporarily balked but not defeated, our dividend diplomats, with the willing hands of President Truman, went into the crisis-making business. If Molotov coughed, it threatened our "security" in Iran. If Vishinsky laughed, we were "endangered" in Korea. By laying down the proper propaganda barrage, we were soon able to by-pass the United Nations and island-hop our way from the Truman Doctrine to Greece and Turkey to the Atlantic Pact. We manufacture crises so rapidly that a new one is shoved in front of us before we can examine yesterday's or the one rushed in this morning.

	We have done these things, we said, rattling our atom bombs, because we love peace.

	But we, too, love peace, said the men in the Kremlin. Your productive capacity was unscathed and came out of the war greater than ever before in the whole history of mankind. It will take us years to restore the losses sustained by Russian industry from the German blitz; Let's get together, talk this thing but and settle our differences amicably so that we can all go about the business of making the world safe forever from another war. Peace we want above all else, said Uncle Joe in messages to America.

	Real Peace Is "Expensive Luxury"

	While the hopes of our people rose at these words, our dividend diplomats recoiled in horror. If the ideological conflict between our side and the Soviets was brought to an end, what would happen to our giant corporations getting fat contracts to make materials of war and products for the anti-Communists of Europe? With no brink-of-war economy, how could General Motors make $600,000,000 in one year in the face of rising unemployment? What would our generals and admirals think? No, real peace is an expensive luxury that the big stockholders and professional soldiers can't afford.

	So, trembling with fear, our dividend diplomats told us that we cannot trust the Russians when they speak of peace.

	...Then one day President Truman announced that the Russians had the atomic bomb. Our dividend diplomats wrung their hands but the people breathed more easily. If both sides had it, the chances of a hot war were quite remote. Neither would start anything for fear of retaliation by the other. Maybe there would be peace at last.



------


II stated that they also discussed deportation proceedings against Mrs. ^ 7 
EARL BROWDER and DAVIS agreed to write a letter to President ROOSEVELT on 
behalf of Mrs. BROWDER. EARL BROWDER, husband of Mrs. BROWDER, was former 
general secretary of the Communist Party in the United States until 19b5« 

The Abraham Lincoln School in Chicago, Illinois, was cited as an adjunct of the 
Communist Party by the Attorney General on December b> 19b7* 





...





 






------




------

https://books.google.com/books?id=ppJHAQAAIAAJ&pg=PA570&lpg=PA570&dq=%22Raissa+Browder%22+deportation&source=bl&ots=wJxTtCUZ5A&sig=mqTL3V-NgkKY4OmTMBRdOG-Yguc&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwiropuw4rbWAhWHSiYKHcFcBDEQ6AEIKTAB#v=onepage&q=%22Raissa%20Browder%22%20deportation&f=false

some hearing on R. Browder deportation


------

https://archive.org/stream/FrankMarshallDavisFBIFile/Frank%20Marshall%20Davis%20012_djvu.txt


maybe has something to do with FM Davis recruitment? was discriminated against, possibly recruited by his lawyer, Ben Davis


------





...


https://archive.org/stream/FrankMarshallDavisFBIFile/Frank%20Marshall%20Davis%20011_djvu.txt
The enclosed report was stamped "confidential 0 
because of the reporting of conversation between DAVIS and 
the informant * If this information was disclosed to un- 
authorized persons it might identify the informant. 

DAVIS is a Key Figure of this office. His Security 
Index Card is current. This case has been re-evaluated in 
‘ ^ light of the Security Index criteria. . It is noted that DAVIS 

] was a regular columnist for the "Honolulu Record” until Hay 

’ of 1957 and has stated he intends to resume, that activity, i 

DAVIS v was also active in the last Communist Party front 
organization, the Hawaii Civil Right's^ Congress; which went 
out of existence in the fall of 1956. He also refused to 
testify before the Senate Internal Security Subcommittee 
in November 1956. It is believed DAVIS still fits the 
Security Index criteria. ; A suitable photograph of DAVIS is 
available. He has : recently been observed by Agents. No 
request was made of the Bureau to- interview subject; .inasmuch 
as it is believed he would be belligerent and . uncooperative . 





https://archive.org/stream/FrankMarshallDavisFBIFile/Frank%20Marshall%20Davis%20012_djvu.txt
April 23, 1963 








By letter dated April 17, 1963, the 
Department advised that the subject's name should 
be removed from the Security Index. This action 
has been taken at the Bureau and similar action 
should be taken with respect to the card maintained 
in your office. 

It is noted that the last report in this 
case was submitted on July 30, 1962. This case should 
be reopened and your investigation brought up to date. 

The results of your investigation should be submitted 
in report form suitable for dissemination, at which time, 
if warranted, you should submit your recommendation as to 
whether subject should be included in the Security Index. 

A review of the file in this matter reveals 
that subject has never been interviewed concerning his 
subversive activities. It is felt that he should be 
interviewed at this time. Unless you are in possession 
of information to indicate otherwise, the interview 
should be conducted in connection with your current 
investigation of him.


------


II stated that they also discussed deportation proceedings against Mrs. ^ 7 
EARL BROWDER and DAVIS agreed to write a letter to President ROOSEVELT on 
behalf of Mrs. BROWDER. EARL BROWDER, husband of Mrs. BROWDER, was former 
general secretary of the Communist Party in the United States until 19b5« 

The Abraham Lincoln School in Chicago, Illinois, was cited as an adjunct of the 
Communist Party by the Attorney General on December b> 19b7* 


In June, 19bb, Confidential Informant ! I stated that FRANK MARSHALL DAVIS 
was one of numerous guests to be invited to a cocktail party for EARL BROWDER 
in the apartment of ! I n Chicago in the near future. 


...


.





https://archive.org/stream/FrankMarshallDavisFBIFile/Frank%20Marshall%20Davis%20004#page/n41/mode/2up
	[REDACTED], a former linotype operator for the Honolulu Record Publishing Company, Ltd, from 1949 to August 1953, advised SA's HAROLD L. CHILD, Jr., and the writer on September 9, 1953, that he was acquainted with subject since the early 1930's when subject was editor of the "Atlanta Daily" at Atlanta, Georgia. he stated he later met subject in Honolulu and was rather surprised to find that subject had remarried and was living in rather luxurious fashion in contrast to his early modest existence. Subject confidentially informed him that his wife, [REDCTED] had [REDACTED] and was to [REDACTED] representing the [REDACTED] in 1954 when she reaches the age of thirty.


https://archive.org/stream/FrankMarshallDavisFBIFile/Frank%20Marshall%20Davis%20004#page/n41/mode/2up
	Mr. DAVIS has signed a number of statements in behalf of Communists under the sponsorship of the Civil Rights Congress. One of these defended was GERHART EISLER, notorious Communist international agent who escaped jailing for passport fraud by fleeing to the Soviet sector of Germany.

	...[DAVIS] was listed by the magazine 'PM' as a signatory to a petition ... calling upon President TRUMAN to effect the immediate release of Communist GERHEART EISLER.


https://archive.org/stream/FrankMarshallDavisFBIFile/Frank%20Marshall%20Davis%20004#page/n35/mode/2up
	"I, [REDACTED], am going to make the following voluntary statement to LEO S. BRENNEISEN, known to me as a Special Agent of the Federal Bureau of Investigation. I am willing to appear in court and testify to the following facts to be cross-examined by Counsel and faced by FRANK MARSHALL DAVIS.

	"I believe it was in 1949 in Honolulu, T. H. when I first met FRANK MARSHALL DAVIS at a social function sponsored by the Hawaii Civil Liberties Committee. I had previously joined the Communist Party in San Francisco in 1946 and transferred my membership in January, 1947 to the Communist Party of Hawaii. In 1950 after the Communist Party had conducted a series of control interviews, [REDACTED], known to me as a Communist Party Organizer, told me that the Party was being reorganized and was going underground. [REDACTED] explained to me that the Party was being broken down into "Groups of 3's" and that I was being made chairman of Group #6 and in addition given the assignment of being contact man for my own group and four other groups. [REDACTED] advised me that Chairman of Group #10 was FRANK MARSHALL DAVIS and I was to contact him at DAVIS' office, then maintained in a building of the Crown Transfer Company in the Damon Tract near the Airport.

	"Later in the fall of 1950, I started contacting FRANK MARSHALL DAVIS in connection with Communist Party matters, and relaying to him information received from my superior contact in he Communist Party, either [REDACTED] or [REDACTED].

	"During a portion of 1950, 1951, and part of 1952, I continued contacting FRANK MARSHALL DAVIS and also transmitted dues for the Communist Party received from him to my contact above. During the period of my contact with FRANK MARSHALL DAVIS, he advised me that his wife, [REDACTED], was a member of Group #10. I was never advised of the identity of a third of that group, or the fact that there was a third member in the group. During a portion of 1951, [REDACteD] took over contacts with the DAVIS group but I resumed contacting DAVIS in 1952 and continued meeting him on Communist Party matters until I left the Party in June of that year.


https://archive.org/stream/FrankMarshallDavisFBIFile/Frank%20Marshall%20Davis%20011#page/n9/mode/2up
	On July 16, 1956, Confidential Informant [REDACTED], contact with whom has not been sufficient to determine his reliability  but who has admitted membership in the Communist Party from the early 1940's to 1950 or 1951, reported that he was acquainted with DAVIS. [REDACTED] advised he knew of no recent Communist Party activity on the part of DAVIS and was of the opinion the Communist Party In Hawaii was dead. 

	On November 1, 1956, Confidential Informant [REDACTED], who has furnished reliable information in the past, reported he knew of no Communist Party activity on the part of DAVIS in recent months other than his writings in the "Honolulu Record". 

	It is to be noted that the "National Guardian", published weekly by the Weekly Guardian Associates, Inc., New York City, New York, dated October 1, 1956, on page 9 carried a statement by EUGENE DENNIS, CP USA functionary, to the effect that the U. S. Communist Party had no members In Hawaii or Alaska unless they be someone there on vacation. 

	On October 15, 1956, Confidential Informant [REDACTED] who has furnished reliable information in the past, reported that FRANK MARSHALL DAYIS was among the 21 persons in Hawaii who were subpoenaed to appear before a hearing of the Senate Internal Security Subcommittee to be held at Honolulu starting November 27, 1956.



------

http://spartacus-educational.com/USAbrowder.htm
	"Browder had been an eager and productive participant in a range of Soviet espionage efforts during the 1930s... recruiting from his 'open' Communist cadres a significant number of those who later became prominent NKVD agents and sources within the American government." Browder's second wife, Raissa Berkman, was also an agent. So also was his sister. Golos pointed out that he paid "Browder's sister... a certain amount of money every month." 


------

https://books.google.com/books?id=ppJHAQAAIAAJ&pg=PA570&lpg=PA570&dq=%22Raissa+Browder%22+deportation&source=bl&ots=wJxTtCUZ5A&sig=mqTL3V-NgkKY4OmTMBRdOG-Yguc&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwiropuw4rbWAhWHSiYKHcFcBDEQ6AEIKTAB#v=onepage&q=%22Raissa%20Browder%22%20deportation&f=false

some hearing on R. Browder deportation


------

https://archive.org/stream/FrankMarshallDavisFBIFile/Frank%20Marshall%20Davis%20012_djvu.txt


maybe has something to do with FM Davis recruitment? was discriminated against, possibly recruited by his lawyer, Ben Davis