http://www.politico.com/magazine/story/2017/08/29/a-storm-made-in-washington-215549
>An investigation last year by ProPublica and the Texas Tribune found that the Houston area’s impervious surfaces increased by 25 percent from 1996 to 2011, as thousands of new homes were built around its bayous. Houston is renowned for its anything-goes zoning rules, but the feds have also promoted those trends by providing extremely cheap insurance in high-risk areas.


They found a way to have the worst of both worlds from limited government and big government.


http://www.philly.com/philly/news/politics/NJ-Democrats-and-Republicans-blast-Trump-plan-for-flood-insurance-hikes.html
>Under Trump’s plan, many could pay more for that insurance.

>His proposal calls for “targeted premium increases” on people who have subsidized insurance and surcharges across the National Flood Insurance Program, to “make the program fiscally sustainable over time and begin paying down the NFIP’s debt,” budget documents said.

>...The Trump budget documents say the administration hopes to begin paying down its debt “while leveling the playing field” for private insurers to compete.

>“By demonstrating to homeowners the true cost of living in a flood plain, the proposal would also incentivize mitigation of flood risk before disasters occur,” the documents say.

------

https://www.propublica.org/article/boomtown-flood-town-text
>Dec. 7, 2016

>Climate change will bring more frequent and fierce rainstorms to cities like Houston. But unchecked development remains a priority in the famously un-zoned city, creating short-term economic gains for some while increasing flood risks for everyone.

>HOUSTON — For the third time in eight years, water gushed into Virginia Hammond’s northwest Houston home.

>It was 2 a.m. on April 18. Over the next several hours, her two granddaughters — ages 12 and 15 — perched on tables, scared to put their feet in the dark gray floodwater rising below them. It nearly topped 3 feet.

>“They couldn’t get in the beds because the beds were wet. They couldn’t go to the bathroom because the water was over the toilet bowl,” Hammond recalled.

>“We were in there, well, trapped.”

>...“More people die here than anywhere else from floods,” said Sam Brody, a Texas A&M University at Galveston researcher who specializes in natural hazards mitigation. “More property per capita is lost here. And the problem’s getting worse.”

>Why?

>Scientists, other experts and federal officials say Houston's explosive growth is largely to blame. As millions have flocked to the metropolitan area in recent decades, local officials have largely snubbed stricter building regulations, allowing developers to pave over crucial acres of prairie land that once absorbed huge amounts of rainwater. That has led to an excess of floodwater during storms that chokes the city’s vast bayou network, drainage systems and two huge federally owned reservoirs, endangering many nearby homes — including Virginia Hammond’s.

>...For Louise Hansen, the story has been the same every time she’s flooded: The water starts to creep into her house in the middle of the night.

>In 2009 — the first time her west Houston home flooded after she moved into it about a decade earlier — she figured it was an anomaly. Then it happened again in 2015. And again in 2016.

>Three times in less than 10 years — for a home that’s not in any floodplain identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency.

>“It’s actually paralyzed me,” said Hansen, who grew up in the area and is now selling her house just for the lot value. “I just don’t think I can go through another flood.” 

>...And it turns out that Houston has seen the most urban flooding of any other area in the country in the past four decades, according to recent analysis by Brody, the Texas A&M scientist.

>Scientists say there are a number of likely culprits. Maps showing where the floodplains are may be outdated, for one thing, and the drainage in this older part of town was likely built before engineers understood the true risk of flooding in the area.

>Then there are the reasons scientists fear local officials are ignoring.

>For one, flood planning is still done by looking at what’s happened in the past. But climate change means that might not work anymore.

>“How do we determine where the 100-year flood zone lies? By looking backwards at rain events in the past,” said Katharine Hayhoe, a climate scientist at Texas Tech University. “Looking backwards does not work so well if climate is changing.”

>...There are many ways to measure the frequency of rare storms in an area. The Harris County Flood Control District does so by tracking rainfall totals for the entire county within a 24-hour period. Based on that data, which dates back to 1989, the county has been hit with eight rare storms.

>Five of those storms are considered to have a 1 in 100 chance of occurring each year, including the rains that hit in May of this year. Another three are considered to be even rarer, including the Tax Day storm in April of this year.

>The flood control district could not provide data in time for this story on rainfall that occurred over a 12-hour period, rather than a 24-hour period. But it nevertheless confirmed that the number of rare storms would be higher. (Enough rain fell during the Memorial Day 2015 storm over 12 hours to classify it as a 100-year event.)

>...The back-to-back floods spurred a rowdy, beer-fueled gathering at a local Veterans of Foreign Wars hall in 1998 and, soon after, the formation of the Cypress Creek Flood Control Coalition. The hope was to curb further development, or encourage more responsible development, to help prevent flooding.

>But little changed, even after another major storm crippled Cypress and the Houston region just three years later — one that scientists say should have served as a wake-up call.

>In June 2001, Tropical Storm Allison dumped almost 40 inches of rain on the city in five days, flooding 73,000 residences and 95,000 vehicles. Twenty-two people died, and damage from the storm was more than $5 billion in Harris County. It likely is the worst rainstorm to ever befall an American city in modern history, according to the flood control district.

>Allison was a shock not just because of the extent of flooding but also where it occurred — almost half of the buildings that flooded were outside floodplains designated by FEMA.

>The tragedy prompted FEMA and the flood control district to redraw floodplain maps, which expanded as much as 20 percent in some areas. And in conjunction with the city, the district spent hundreds of millions of dollars to improve drainage, widen bayous and build detention ponds to temporarily hold floodwater.

>But when local politicians tried to change policies over development, they were met with stiff resistance from developers and residents.

>The city did pursue a law banning new development or major renovations of existing buildings in areas called floodways — the most vulnerable parts of the 100-year floodplain that are closest to the bayous. That prompted multiple lawsuits, and the law was ultimately severely weakened by the city council two years later.


>...Stable Gate was one of many neighborhoods built in the area after Allison. It wasn’t in a floodplain when it was built in 2001, but new flood maps that took effect six years later placed a large swath of the subdivision in the 100-year floodplain, triggering flood insurance requirements for many residents. Parts of the neighborhood were also placed in a newly expanded 500-year floodplain — an area with a smaller but still notable chance of flooding each year.

>Summers’ home ended up in a 500-year floodplain after the new maps took effect. She doesn’t need to buy flood insurance, but she still carries it for about $400 a year.

>Greg Bowen, president of the Stable Gate Homeowners Association, said the neighborhood “was built on the best data they had at the time.”

>But even with the new flood maps, development has continued in the 100-year floodplains. Since 2010, more than 7,000 residential buildings have been built in these risky areas in Harris County, according to a Tribune/ProPublica analysis of local appraisal data, along with more than 1,600 nonresidential buildings.


	...Long said there was no way the Corps — or anyone — could’ve predicted 70 years ago the kind of growth the Houston area has seen. If it had, he says the Corps probably would’ve done things differently — bought up more land around the reservoirs, for example, or at least acquired easements allowing the agency to flood it when necessary. (The Corps has such legal agreements for most of its reservoirs.)

	The agency has little to no control over development, though. Long says its hands were tied by local politicians and other factors, including the whims of various presidents and congresses with differing views on how much land the government should own and who controls the Army Corps budget.

	“Today if we were starting over again knowing what has happened, would our battle lines be a little different? Yeah, our battle lines would definitely be different. But we don’t have that pleasure of doing that,” Long said.

	...Original plans for the Addicks and Barker reservoirs included a levee that would’ve prevented the overflow problem and a canal that would have evacuated more water out of the reservoirs. Those components were dropped due to some combination of time and money, Long said — decisions that would come back to haunt the Army Corps decades later.

	The flood control district has said it will split the $3 million cost to study the impact of development on the reservoirs with the Corps, but Congress hasn’t yet authorized the funding. Any study will only mark the beginning of what could be a long and expensive process; more studies are likely to be needed, Long said.

	...Bedient said the additional reservoir “is absolutely a critical necessity” if the county wants to avoid another scenario like the Tax Day flood.

	“They have no choice,” he said. “If they don’t do that, we’re going to get another one of these, you know, maybe not in five years but ... within the next decade. It’s just absurd.”

	...He also indicated there was little chance that the city or county would be able to implement stricter regulations on development in floodplains, even though the neighboring county, Fort Bend, has been able to do so.

	Not only are the rules lax, critics say, but also local officials don’t always enforce them. Costello, Houston's flood czar, agrees.

	“Some of the residents are saying that we don't have the resources to go out and police what has been done,” he said of irresponsible development. “If you drive around parts of the city, you'll get confirmation of that. ... This is a very big city, and we have limited resources.”

	(The flood control district said it has plenty of resources to police development in Harris County, though experts and residents strongly disagree.)
	
	And the Army Corps of Engineers, which regulates development in coastal wetlands, only has about 10 people in charge of making sure the rules are followed for all of Texas and Louisiana.

	“Our budget is fixed by Congress, and it’s been flatlined for three or five years,” said Kimberly Baggette, chief of the regulatory division at the Army Corps’ Galveston District. (Whether that will change under the new president remains to be seen.) 


who contributed to this?

------

https://www.nytimes.com/2017/08/28/opinion/harvey-flooding-mayor-evacuation.html
>As the rains from Tropical Storm Harvey continue to pound Houston, stranding thousands of people in their homes, a question has emerged: Should local officials, particularly Mayor Sylvester Turner, have ordered mandatory evacuations?

>The answer is absolutely not.

>It is logistically impossible to evacuate millions of people from low-lying coastal areas ahead of a major hurricane. The disastrous evacuation in preparation for Hurricane Rita in 2005 proved the case.

>Hours before the hurricane hit 2.5 million Texans fled town at the same time, according to The Houston Chronicle. This caused enormous, daylong traffic jams. While stranded on highways, people were injured or killed from heat stroke. Others got in fights. And a bus that was transporting elderly people from a nursing home exploded, killing 23 people.

>In total, some 130 people died in that evacuation, more than have ever perished in a hurricane in the state’s history, with the exception of the 1900 Galveston storm. Of those deaths, about half occurred before the storm hit Texas.



------


https://www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/houston-is-paying-the-price-for-public-officials-ignorance/2017/08/29/1566f14e-8c29-11e7-8df5-c2e5cf46c1e2_story.html



https://www.nationalmortgagenews.com/news/trump-budget-could-worsen-flood-insurance-woes
>WASHINGTON — The Trump administration's decision to slash all funding for the flood mapping and loss mitigation efforts in flood-prone communities is getting pushback from supporters of better flood management policies.

>The budget cuts to mapping will be "devastating," Chad Berginnis, executive director of the Association of State Floodplain Managers, said Thursday during a House Financial Services subcommittee hearing. Mapping, he said, is the "cornerstone of everything else" the National Flood Insurance Program does — "the mitigation, the land use and even the insurance." 



https://www.forbes.com/sites/ccasazza/2017/03/28/trump-slashing-funding-to-the-national-flood-insurance-program-can-cause-rates-to-go-up/#6100da924473
>Mar 28, 2017

>Among the many programs targeted for cuts in the Trump Administration's “America First” 2018 budget is the National Flood Insurance Program, specifically its Hazard Flood Mapping program. The cut would save the federal government $190 million dollars a year --an average of $0.63 cents per person-- but could end up costing those who live in flood-risk areas thousands in the long run.

>...If an outdated map shows a home is in a lower-risk area when in fact it is now in a high-risk area, the homeowner may not be recommended flood insurance or choose not to buy it because of the low-risk of flooding.

>...FEMA, the agency that manages the NFIP, has begun in recent years to update and modernize maps for every county and town in the country. Working closely with local communities requires coordination between different parties, and thus a significant amount of funding to keep the program going.

>Unfortunately, most of the maps still remain outdated, and become more so with each year as flood lines continue to change. According to FEMA, 45% of all maps are 10 years and older while 75% are five years and older. According to the Consumer Federation of America, after Hurricane Katrina, 76 maps were replaced in Jackson, Mississippi where most were 20 years old, and an average of 10 feet too low in assessing flood risk.

>Defunding could disrupt or further slow down the updating of maps.  The America First budget mentions that teams will “instead explore other more effective and fair means of funding flood mapping efforts”. No further details are provided, and the White House did not respond to requests for comments.

>...Should there be a drawn out bureaucratic issue, and the maps are not updated at all, the financial (and safety) consequences can be even more dire. As time moves on, there is likely to be more and more people living in improperly categorized homes--underestimating their risk of flood. Should an unexpected flood happen sometime in the near future, they could face damages costing tens of thousands of dollars. Thousands of homes can be destroyed, and thousands can be displaced. 


http://bayplanningcoalition.org/2017/05/politico-budget-would-s
lash-army-corps-despite-trump-infrastructure-focus/

>President Donald Trump’s budget blueprint would slash the Army Corps of Engineers’ budget by more than 16 percent, undercutting his administration’s emphasis on infrastructure — and following the pattern set by his predecessors in which Congress restores the funds.

>The nation’s builder of locks, dams, levees and ports would receive $5 billion under the Trump budget proposal, with $1.02 billion tagged for its all-important construction account, a cut of more than 50 percent from 2017, when additional disaster funds were appropriated. The agency would see a 29 percent reduction in its investigations account, limiting its ability to lay the groundwork for new water resources projects. 



http://www.nola.com/environment/index.ssf/2017/05/trump_2018_corps_budget_leaves.html
>May 30, 2017

>The $744 million West Shore Lake Pontchartrain hurricane risk reduction project is intended to avoid a repeat of the disastrous River Parishes flooding caused by Hurricane Isaac in 2012, and officials in St. John the Baptist Parish in particular have campaigned hard for federal funding for the project. But it's one of several major hurricane protection and water resource projects that will receive no money under President Donald Trump's proposed fiscal 2018 budget for the Army Corps of Engineers, a corps official confirmed Tuesday.

>The corps budget also includes no money for the 92-mile, $10.3 billion Morganza to the Gulf hurricane levee system, which is designed to protect Houma and other south central Louisiana communities. That levee system already is under construction, using tax money raised by Terrebonne and Lafourche parish residents.

>...The corps budget also includes no money for the Southwest Coastal Louisiana project, which includes hurricane risk reduction and environmental restoration projects for Calcasieu, Cameron and Vermilion parishes. This project also was authorized by Congress in 2016.

>Also authorized by Congress in 2016, but getting no money in the proposed 2018 budget, is the St. Tammany Parish Government Comprehensive Coastal Master Plan, which also includes both hurricane risk reduction and environmental restoration features.


https://www.usnews.com/news/news/articles/2017-07-03/forecaster-says-budget-cuts-could-hurt-hurricane-predictions
	MIAMI (AP) — Recent progress in forecasting the intensity of hurricanes — which has lagged behind storm track forecasting — could be undermined by proposed cuts in federal funding for tropical weather research, says the retiring chief of a team of U.S. hurricane specialists.

	The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration launched the Hurricane Forecast Improvement Program in 2009 with a $13 million budget. Funding has shrunk to less than half that, and President Donald Trump's proposed budget includes further cuts to NOAA and the National Weather Service.


http://www.reuters.com/article/us-usa-trump-budget-idUSKBN16R2FT
	A proposal by the Trump administration to cut $190 million in funding for updating U.S. maps of flood-prone areas would trigger higher insurance rates or more homebuilding in risky locations, a consumer group said on Monday.

	Flood-mapping provides important details about where it is safe to build, whether flood insurance is needed and how to price coverage, Robert Hunter, director of insurance for the Consumer Federation of America, said in a statement.

	Slashing funding for the National Flood Insurance Program’s (NFIP) retooling of U.S. flood maps will lead to relying on old maps and construction in areas that are now flood prone, or hiking insurance premiums to pay for new maps, Hunter said. 


http://www.npr.org/sections/thetwo-way/2017/08/16/543712263/trump-rolls-back-obama-era-flood-standards-for-infrastructure-projects
	Speaking at Trump Tower in New York City, Trump said, "We're going to get infrastructure built quickly, inexpensively, relatively speaking, and the permitting process will go very, very quickly." Few details were revealed in that news conference, but the text of the order has since been published and it specifically revokes Obama's flood risk rules.


http://www.politico.com/story/2017/08/15/full-text-trump-comments-white-supremacists-alt-left-transcript-241662
	TRUMP: ...We're going to get infrastructure built quickly, inexpensively, relatively speaking and the permitting process will go very, very quickly. No longer will we tolerate one job killing delay after another. No longer will we accept a broken system that benefits consultants and lobbyists at the expense of hard working Americans. Now, I knew the process very well – probably better than anybody. I had to get permits for this building and many of the buildings I built. All of the buildings I built in Manhattan and many other places, and I will tell you that the consultants are rich people. They go around making it very difficult. They lobby congress, they lobby state government, city governments to make it very difficult so that you have to hire consultants and that you have to take years and pay them a fortune, so we’re streamlining the process, and we won't be having so much of that anymore.


https://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2017/08/15/presidential-executive-order-establishing-discipline-and-accountability
	By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, and in order to ensure that the Federal environmental review and permitting process for infrastructure projects is coordinated, predictable, and transparent, it is hereby ordered as follows:

	...Sec. 6.  Executive Order 13690 of January 30, 2015 (Establishing a Federal Flood Risk Management Standard and a Process for Further Soliciting and Considering Stakeholder Input), is revoked.

	...DONALD J. TRUMP


https://weather.com/science/environment/news/harvey-trump-revokes-executive-order-flood-risk-building-standards
	The Obama-era standards required public structures such as subsidized housing and water treatment plants to be built at least 2 feet above the 100-year flood standard, the Washington Post noted. Other more critical structures, like hospitals, were required to be built 3 feet above that line.

	The Obama-era standards required public structures such as subsidized housing and water treatment plants to be built at least 2 feet above the 100-year flood standard, the Washington Post noted. Other more critical structures, like hospitals, were required to be built 3 feet above that line.


http://www.nad.usace.army.mil/Media/News-Releases/Article/562190/us-army-corps-of-engineers-releases-report-on-coastal-storm-and-flood-risk-in-t/
	The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers today released to the public a report detailing the results of a two-year study to address coastal storm and flood risk to vulnerable populations, property, ecosystems, and infrastructure in the North Atlantic region of the United States affected by Hurricane Sandy in October, 2012.  Congress authorized this report in January 2013 in the Disaster Relief Appropriations Act of 2013 (Public Law 113-2). 


https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/energy-environment/wp/2015/01/30/in-major-shift-obama-administration-will-plan-for-rising-seas-in-all-federal-projects/
	In major shift, Obama administration will plan for rising seas in all federal projects 



https://www.reuters.com/article/us-usa-trump-infrastructure-idUSKCN1AV1ZI
	The American Petroleum Institute said in a statement that the order reflects recommendations the oil industry lobby group submitted to the Commerce Department in March. The National Association of Home Builders also praised the Trump administration’s move, saying the flood rules had raised the cost of housing. 

	...The Obama-era standard required that builders factor in scientific projections for increased flooding and ensure projects can withstand rising sea levels and stronger downpours.

	It required all federal agencies apply the standard to public infrastructure projects from housing to highways.

	Rafael Lemaitre, former director of public affairs at FEMA who worked on the Obama-era order, said Trump is undoing “the most significant action taken in a generation” to safeguard U.S. infrastructure.

	“Eliminating this requirement is self-defeating; we can either build smarter now, or put taxpayers on the hook to pay exponentially more when it floods. And it will,” he said. 



https://www.eenews.net/stories/1060054536
	...Add climate change to the common bouts of inundation, and towns along the Mississippi are confronting a new reality, Walker said, one that compounds the misery of previous floods. The 180-year-old town has had five flood events in the past four years, he said, and four of those have been in the top 10 flooding disasters in Alton's history.

	"We're now living in a world of extremes on the Mississippi River," he said. "We just don't get normal spring rains anymore. We get huge downpours."

	..."I hope people are just realizing that climate change is playing a role in all these tragedies our region is facing these past several years," said David Stokes, a Republican who serves as executive director of the St. Louis-based Great Rivers Habitat Alliance, an organization that addresses issues affecting wetlands and floodplain use in the confluence region of the Mississippi, Missouri and Illinois rivers.

	..."The flooding is man-made and will just get worse as climate change gets worse," she added. "The storms will get worse, the rainfall will get heavier, we'll have higher amounts in smaller time periods — and that will cause the river to flood."

	It irritates her that so many people who supported President Trump in her region now say they want Federal Emergency Management Agency money for floodplain buyouts and other disasters linked to climate change.

	"If they want to get FEMA funds, they should vote for a president who's going to fund FEMA," she said.

	...He has in the St. Louis region a perfect laboratory for the double whammy of man-made flood control and the impacts of climate change. Poor floodplain management, including levees that are too high and construction in flood-prone areas, has over-channelized the Mississippi River and its tributaries, Criss said.

	"You constrict the rivers and don't let them spread out, they get high," Criss said. "You build in these places, you don't need climate change to do this to you."

	Emilie and Steve Hayes found Criss' work when they began looking for answers in early 2016 after a creek flooded their home in the St. Louis suburb of Sunset Hills. They were told by town officials that the floodwaters that blew open their basement door in the middle of the night "like a hand grenade" were an anomaly and that it was unlikely they'd be flooded out again by a winter storm.

	They knew better. When the Meramec River floods, so does the creek, something they learned shortly after they moved into their home in 2008. The house was built in the 1950s and sits along a creek known as "Tributary B" on flood maps. It's actually a floodway, a place designated by floodplain managers for overflow floodwaters. From Criss, they learned their home should have been torn down after a major flood in 1983.

	After the December 2015 flood, it took 13 months to get a flood insurance payout. Their mortgage company made them pay off their note with their flood insurance check.

	Now, they have a vacant home they can't live in, but they still get a tax bill every year. They fear city code enforcement will force them to tear it down — it happened to one of their neighbors — and they'll be stuck with valueless land. They applied for a FEMA buyout via a state program but learned it was rejected because Sunset Hills, a town of about 8,000 people, wasn't willing to pay the 25 percent match needed to accept the federal money. They also asked the city if it would buy the land from them for flood runoff if they demolished the property, but the city declined.

	Their uninhabited home flooded for a second time this May. The Hayeses say all they want to do is walk away with enough money to start fresh somewhere on higher ground.

	"We can't sell it," Emilie Hayes said. "We wouldn't morally sell it, because why would you want to put another family into that position?"

	...FEMA bought about 300 homes after the record-breaking 1993 floods. The city has estimated it would cost about $1.75 million to buy out about four dozen remaining flood-prone properties.

	As in Sunset Hills, that's a challenge for a town of 20,000 people with an annual budget of only $16 million, said Mayor Ron Counts. They cannot do it without federal help, he said.

	"You want to help us? Buy this thing out, get this off our plate, and we'll all prosper in a lot nicer, better environment," he said. "We can get the job done if they'll just give us the money to get it done."

	He and the city administrator, Bryan Richison, say they also think about the ongoing costs of managing flooding. They add up the costs of responding to the increased flooding they've been seeing, as well as repairing city infrastructure. Buyouts would pay for themselves, they say.

	"Guess what? It's going to happen again," Counts said. "The first big storm to come through, it would pay for itself."

	...Counts and other mayors understand that disasters are on the rise, though. Counts laughs when Wellenkamp is asked whether there's such a thing as a 100-year flood anymore.

	Wellenkamp trots out familiar statistics: Since 2011, the 10-state Mississippi River corridor has seen $50 billion in natural disaster impacts, including a 100-year flood, a 200-year flood, a 500-year flood, a 50-year drought and two hurricanes.

	...Stokes, of the St. Louis-based Great Rivers Habitat Alliance, says there's an "immediate fix."

	"We could force these illegally high levees to reduce their levees; we could stop developing in the floodplain. It might be hard to fix the things we've already done wrong, but at least we can stop making it worse. We can stop future floodplain development. And at the same time, we can support climate change policies, too," he said.

	...Just north of Memphis where the Mississippi has turned broad and brown, Jim Brown sat beside the river reading a Nicholas Sparks novel and drinking a beer. Brown, a retired engineer, has lived most of his life in this town.

	He was hanging out on a spot in the river known as Sans Souci, the site of a 10,000-acre plantation. The locals who call it "San Sue" have no sense for the romance or the melody of the original French pronunciation, he said. "It means without care or worry," he explained.

	He had never met a reporter from Washington, D.C., and had a lot of questions about climate change. He's a Trump supporter and a mild climate skeptic, looking for more information about the subject. He offered up a beer for the discussion.

	"It just needs to be proven to me by someone other than a politician," he said. "If I could hear the facts from someone that I trust ... I would like to know because it is a serious problem."

	He offers up that winters are much milder than when he was a child, an observation that many others have also had up and down the river.

	"We used to get several snows, maybe 6 to 8 inches, but we don't get much more than a dusting anymore," he said.

	As for Trump's assertion that climate change is a hoax, Brown had this explanation: "He's a politician, but he's got a good mind on his shoulders for statistics. He may be riding in the same boat as I am; it just needs to be proven to him in a straight-up way."

------


https://www.washingtonpost.com/video/local/weather/should-houston-have-been-evacuated-ahead-of-harvey-fema-responds/2017/08/28/76c4e0c2-8bed-11e7-9c53-6a169beb0953_video.html?utm_term=.bde6f40cf044

FEMA guy Brock Long defends decision not to evacuate



http://thehill.com/blogs/blog-briefing-room/348340-houston-mayor-to-immigrants-if-you-face-deportation-for-seeking





https://www.propublica.org/article/boomtown-flood-town-text
	...The longtime head of the flood control district flat-out disagrees with scientific evidence that shows development is making flooding worse. Engineering projects can reverse the effects of land development and are doing so, Mike Talbott said in an interview with The Texas Tribune and ProPublica in late August before his retirement after 18 years heading the powerful agency. (His successor shares his views.)

	The claim that “these magic sponges out in the prairie would have absorbed all that water is absurd,” Talbott said.

	He also said the flood control district has no plans to study climate change or its impacts on Harris County, the third-most-populous county in the United States.

	Of the astonishing frequency of huge floods the city has been getting, he said, “I don't think it's the new normal.” He also criticized scientists and conservationists for being “anti-development.”

	“They have an agenda ... their agenda to protect the environment overrides common sense,” he said.

	...“You need to find some better experts,” he said. When asked for names, he would only say, “starting here, with me.”

	Not a single scientist or expert of a dozen interviewed by The Texas Tribune and ProPublica shared his view on such matters.


	...At the raucous 1998 VFW meeting that inspired Smith and his neighbors to form the coalition, he recalled someone demanding they put the local county commissioner’s “ass in a boat” to tour the extensive damage.

	Nearly 20 years later, that county commissioner — Radack — is still fielding angry feedback from residents.

	At an August town hall, Radack told more than 300 seething attendees packed into a church auditorium that they were part of the problem. He said it all came down to paying for flood control projects and said he would vote for a tax increase to do so.

	“This is what this is all about,” he said, repeatedly. “Government — it takes money.”

	But residents urged Radack to support stricter development criteria and enforce the existing rules. They also repeatedly said the county should somehow curb growth outright.

	“Just stop building,” one woman yelled, inciting cheers.

	“A whole lot of you people live in subdivisions that in many people’s opinion should have never been built,” Radack responded. “But people have a right to development. They own the land, if they follow the rules.”

	“But they’re not,” several people in the crowd shouted in unison.

	Asked about such sentiments, Talbott said resident expectations are too high.

	“I've heard the members of the public say they never want their streets to flood, and they don't want their houses to flood,” he said. “That's just unrealistic.”


https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/post-nation/wp/2017/08/29/harvey-takes-aim-at-louisiana-as-trump-plans-to-survey-stricken-texas/?utm_term=.f25b712bc742
>Authorities added that there had been reports of people impersonating law enforcement officers in communities such as Kingwood, falsely telling people they needed to evacuate.


interesting

------


https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/post-nation/wp/2017/08/29/harvey-takes-aim-at-louisiana-as-trump-plans-to-survey-stricken-texas/?utm_term=.9769b6d65364


Impact of storm