




http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/worldnews/10790144/Kim-Philby-had-no-regrets-about-betraying-Britain-to-the-Soviet-Union-recordings-reveal.html
	He was first introduced to Communism by Maurice Dobb, a fellow of King’s College, Cambridge and tutor in economics who put him in touch with a party organisation working in Austria to help refugees fleeing Nazi Germany. Here he met and fell in love with Litzi Friedmann, an Austrian Communist, who put him in touch with Arnold Deutsch, the Hungarian-born Soviet agent who eventually recruited him.




http://spartacus-educational.com/Maurice_Dobb.htm
	Anthony Cave Brown, the author of Treason of Blood (1995) has argued that it was Maurice Dobb who converted Philby to Marxism: "His message was that of the classless, scientifically run society offered by Marx, the decline of capitalism, the high superiority of the very fashionable dialectical materialism. This, in theory, was meant to provide both a general worldview and a specific method for the investigation of scientific problems. It was the official philosophy of communism. Dialectical materialism captured many men with Kim's disposition; and it is said that when he understood it, he experienced the blinding light of reality and certainty about life, a light similar to that experienced by some religious believers when they first sense the presence of God." (7)


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anthony_Cave_Brown
	Cave Brown began his reporting career in Luton and Bristol before moving to Fleet Street in the mid-1950s where he joined the Daily Mail. During the late 1950s he covered the Hungarian uprising (in 1956) and the Algerian War of Independence. In 1958 he was awarded Reporter of the Year. Cave Brown secured the first Western interview with Egyptian president, Gamel Abdel Nasser, and was a frequent drinking companion of Kim Philby in the Middle East prior to the latter's 1963 defection to the Soviet Union. 


Maybe Mr. Brown isn't being forthcoming


https://www.fishpond.co.nz/Books/Young-Kim-Philby-Edward-Harrison/9780859898676
	Kim Philby is perhaps the most notorious traitor in British History and the archetypal spy: ingenious, charming and deceitful. The reluctance of the British and Russian governments to reveal full details of his career meant that for many years a shortage of evidence fuelled controversy. Was Philby an ideological spy, working for the Soviet Union out of Communist conviction, or was he prompted by a personality defect to choose a life of treachery?


	...Was Philby the perfect agent, the 'KGB masterspy', or just plain lucky? In this new biography, Edward Harrison re-examines the crucial early years of Philby's work as a Soviet agent and British intelligence officer using documents from the United Kingdom National Archives, and private papers. He shows how Philby established an early pattern of deceit and betrayed his father St John Philby. But the book also demonstrates how in all the major decisions Philby slavishly sought to emulate his father. This contradicts the myth of independence Philby sought to propagate in 'My Silent War' (his memoirs), along with other deceptions. Later chapters offer the first detailed study of Philby's work as a counter-espionage officer during the Second World War, examining his rapid promotion and providing a substantial explanation of why he was appointed head of the anti-Soviet section of the British Secret Intelligence Service. Harrison also explains that Philby was never wholly trusted by the Soviet secret service.


https://www.theguardian.com/world/defence-and-security-blog/2012/sep/27/espionage-mi6


https://books.google.com/books?id=i8ZPDqB_Ny0C&pg=PA47
	Phibys socialist ideas were first instilled at his prep schoo, Westminster, and not at Cambridge, as others have suggested.


http://www.nytimes.com/1994/07/10/magazine/kim-philby-and-the-age-of-paranoia.html?pagewanted=all&mcubz=0

Philby a triple agent?

	 Without a doubt, the mind of Philby was a key junction box, a node, a filter through which some of the most secret messages of the war were routed. But the question remains: Was Philby merely a courier or was he a creator?

	That question, I believe, is at the heart of the continuing fascination with Philby: we're still not sure whose game he was playing, or what his own game really was. He remains a one-man enigma machine whose true aims and motivations have yet to be fully decrypted. 


Philby doing his own thing?




http://spartacus-educational.com/Maurice_Dobb.htm
	Before leaving Cambridge University he went to see Dobb, and asked him how best he might "devote his life to the communist cause". Philby later recalled: "On my very last day at Cambridge I decided that I would become a communist. I asked a don I admired, Maurice Dobb, how I should go about it. He gave me an introduction to a communist group in Paris, a perfectly legal and open group. They in turn passed me on to a communist underground organization in Vienna. Matters were at crisis point in Austria and this underground organization needed volunteers. I helped smuggle wanted socialists and communists out of the country." (8) 


http://blog.nationalarchives.gov.uk/blog/grandmother-us-spy-recruited-philby/
	The activities of Kim Philby, arguably the most important Soviet spy of the Cold War, are comparatively well known, but there has always been a mystery surrounding his recruitment. The files released on the relatively unassuming figure of Edith Tudor-Hart (KV 2/4091–4093) go a long way to solving this. Born in Austria as Edith Suschitzky, she was associated with left wing movements from early on in her life and married the British doctor Alexander Tudor-Hart, both becoming members of the Communist Party of Great Britain. Edith was close friends with Litzi Friedmann, who would become Philby’s first wife and MI5 believed that it was through this connection that Tudor Hart came to know Philby in Vienna in the early 1930s. There is strong evidence to suggest that it was Tudor-Hart who first introduced Philby to Arnold Deutsch, the Soviet agent who was to initially run Philby and the other spies in the Cambridge Five ring. As such one source told MI5 that she was ‘the grandmother of us all’.



http://spartacus-educational.com/Litzi_Friedmann.htm
	Natasha Walter has argued: "For her, the young Englishman who presented himself at her door in 1933 was, at first, a potentially useful helper and source of funds.... Philby had already been intellectually convinced by communism, but Friedman radicalised him. He began to work with her - begging people for money, acting as a courier for underground organisations, helping hunted militants to get out of Vienna, and seeing what the fight against fascism meant for people risking their lives because of it. As he himself said later, these experiences crystallised his faith."

	...In January 1934 Arnold Deutsch, one of NKVD's agents, was sent to London. As a cover for his spying activities he did post-graduate work at London University. In May he made contact with Edith and Litzi. They discussed the recruitment of Soviet spies. Litzi suggested her husband.

	...Deutsch asked Philby if he was willing to spy for the Soviet Union: "Otto spoke at great length, arguing that a person with my family background and possibilities could do far more for Communism than the run-of-the-mill Party member or sympathiser... I accepted. His first instructions were that both Lizzy and I should break off as quickly as possible all personal contact with our Communist friends." It is claimed by Christopher Andrew, the author of The Defence of the Realm: The Authorized History of MI5 (2009) that Philby became the first of "the ablest group of British agents ever recruited by a foreign intelligence service."


------

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/St_John_Philby

father was a socialist, also said nice-things about Hitler, some odd beliefs

reccomended Philby for MI6



------


S.J hamrick book:

	Years later Friedman would call her marriage part convenience, part
love. Convenience wasfulfilledonFebruary26whenshewasissuedaBritish
passport at the British embassy in Vienna. In early May the couple returned
to settle in London. 


Litzi using Philby? dunno if Philby would care



-------


Philby autobiography


"C URTAIN R AISER : A W HIFF OF THE F IRING S QUAD"


seems very theatrical


pg 33

	For ten years, I had taken a serious interest in international politics; I had wandered about Europe in a wide arc from Portugal to Greece; I had already formed some less than half-baked ideas on the subversion of the Nazi regime.


so what was he just into this kindof shit? subversion?

	...It appeared later that the only enquiry made into my past was a
routine reference to MI5, who passed my name through their records and came
back with the laconic statement: Nothing Recorded Against. Today, every new
spy scandal in Britain produces a flurry of judicial statements on the subject of
“positive vetting.” But in that happier Eden positive vetting had never been
heard of. Sometimes, in the early weeks, I felt that perhaps I had not made the
grade after all. It seemed that somewhere, lurking in deep shadow, there must be
another service, really secret and really powerful, capable of backstairs
machination on such a scale as to justify the perennial suspicions of, say, the
French. * But it soon became clear that such was not the case. It was the death of
an illusion. Its passing caused me no pain


heh

	...My bugbear on the training committee
was a certain Colonel Chidson. * He had played an astute part in rescuing a lot of
industrial diamonds from Hitler in Poland, but to me he was a pain in the neck.
He had visions of anarchy stalking Europe, and resisted bitterly the whole idea
of letting a lot of thugs loose on the continent. One day, I spotted him coming
towards me in Lower Regent Street. A moment later, he saw me and froze in his
tracks. In a swift recovery, he turned up his coat collar and dived into a side-
street. Our training school had evidently become very necessary.


does Philby think he is the master spy?


pg 123

	...I have indulged in this digression to answer certain writers who have
attributed the unusual course of my life to the influence of my father. It is
possible that his eccentricities enabled me, in early youth, to resist some of the
more outrageous prejudices of the English public-school system of forty years
ago. But very little research would show that, at all the decisive turning-points in
my life, he was thousands of miles out of reach. If he had lived a little longer to
learn the truth, he would have been thunderstruck, but by no means
disapproving. I was perhaps the only member of his wide acquaintance to whom
he was never rude, and to whose opinions he invariably listened with respect—
even on his own precious Arab world. I never took this uncritically as a
compliment. I have heard it said, possibly wrongly, that Winston Churchill gave
weight to the opinions of his own son, Randolph.


mentions accusations that his father put him up to it, says his father would have been surprised but approved


pg 73

	...I was
prepared to dislike him thoroughly, as I had heard appalling reports of him; his
nickname was “Creeping Jesus.” My first impressions tended to confirm the
awful reports I had been given. He had most of the qualities I dislike most; it
would be no justice to describe him as a selfish and conceited snob.


Philby dislikes snobs? hmmm


	...Furthermore, I was increasingly drawn to
him for his inability to assess the intelligence that passed through his hands.
Although he was more than twice my age, he came to rely on my judgement. In
my turn, I paid him all the outward signs of respect. Our personal association,
despite its inherent absurdity, became quite a happy one. It was also of great
value to me because, among the waffle and gossip that fills most diplomatic
bags, there is sometimes a pearl of price. He would, of course, never have
claimed the prerogative of using green ink; he used purple instead.


seems to like using people?


pg 130

	My Spyglass proposals were described as “extraordinarily interesting.” This
was very gratifying.


pg 24

	But many of
those who made the choice in those days changed sides when some of the worst
features of Stalinism became apparent. I stayed the course. It is reasonable to ask
why.

	It is extremely difficult for the ordinary human being, lacking the gift of total
recall, to describe exactly how he reached such-and-such a decision more than
thirty years ago. In my own case, an attempt to do so would make appallingly
tedious reading. But, as the question will be asked, it must be answered, even if
the answer takes the form of gross over-simplification.


why did he keep spying for the Soviets?


-------


spy among friends book

pg 38

	A few weeks later, the newlyweds arrived in London, where they lodged with
Philby’s mother. Conventional Dora Philby, desperate to keep up appearances
despite a perennial shortage of money, was not best pleased to find her son
married to a foreign communist. She regarded his politics as another passing
adolescent phase, like acne. ‘I do hope Kim gets a job to get him off this bloody
communism,’ Mrs Philby wrote to her husband in Saudi Arabia. ‘He’s not quite
extreme yet, but may become so.’ St John was unconcerned by his son’s
radicalism. ‘Excess can always be toned down afterwards,’ he declared.


father knew about Philby's Communism, not concerned?


	Out of the June sunshine appeared a short, stout man in his early thirties with
curly fair hair and intelligent eyes. He spoke English with a strong East
European accent, and introduced himself as ‘Otto’. Philby never forgot their first
conversation. Otto spoke about art and music, his love of Paris and his dislike of
London. This, Philby reflected, was a ‘man of considerable cultural
background’. Philby was entranced: ‘He was a marvellous man. Simply
marvellous. I felt that immediately. The first thing you noticed about him were
his eyes. He looked at you as if nothing more important in life than you and
talking to you existed at that moment.’ That was a quality many found in Philby
too. Gradually, their conversation drifted towards politics, and then the works of
Marx and Lenin, which Otto seemed to know by heart. Philby, in turn, described
his political experiences in Cambridge, his activities in Vienna, and his wish to
join the Communist Party. They spoke in euphemisms, with Otto hinting that he
could put ‘important and interesting work’ in Philby’s direction. As with most
espionage relationships, this one began not with politics, but with friendship. ‘I
trusted him from the start,’ wrote Philby. ‘It was an amazing conversation.’ They
agreed to meet again.


a marxist circle-jerk?



------

http://www.bbc.com/news/uk-35943428

http://www.abc.net.au/news/2016-04-08/barrowclough-the-spy-and-the-video-that-cant-be-trusted/7310470


something weird going on here



------


https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/mar/31/spy-kim-philby-disillusioned-communism
	Philby had other less damaging routines: a cup of Russian tea at 7am and English tea with milk at 5pm, drunk from a fine porcelain cup.


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rufina_Pukhova



-----


http://www.nytimes.com/1988/05/12/obituaries/kim-philby-double-agent-dies.html?pagewanted=all&mcubz=1
	But Western intelligence officials have always believed the Mr. Philby lied about his recruitment to protect his friends and colleagues, and that by the time he left Cambridge, Mr. Philby was a Soviet agent, and that he may have carried out an initial probationary assignment in Vienna. 



------


http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2016/04/04/kim-philby-was-a-bad-liar-his-true-talent-lay-in-self-mythology/
	Nigel West

	...Philby consistently betrayed his women too, most of whom could broadly be characterised as emotionally vulnerable. While still married to his first wife, Lizzy,  he had three illegitimate children by Aileen, a psychiatric case and self-harmer. He treated her so badly that she confided in her psychiatrist that if she ever died in unexplained circumstances, he had probably murdered her.


West seems to have a stick up his ass