https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Divide_and_rule
    Divide and rule (or divide and conquer, from Latin dīvide et īmpera) in politics and sociology is gaining and maintaining power by breaking up larger concentrations of power into pieces that individually have less power than the one implementing the strategy. The concept refers to a strategy that breaks up existing power structures, and especially prevents smaller power groups from linking up, causing rivalries and fomenting discord among the people.

    ...Historically, this strategy was used in many different ways by empires seeking to expand their territories.

    ...Historical examples

    Following the October revolution, the Bolsheviks...


https://books.google.com/books?id=YWUxDKN80BgC&pg=PA336
    Russian fascism's main home was outside Europe, in Manchuria. The Russian Fascist Party, modelled on Mussolini's movement, was founded in the city of Harbin in 1931. Here, on the remote reaches of the Sungary river, thousands of Russians who had fled from the revolution constructed a little Russia. In a city teeming with different nationalities, the Russians printed and read numerous papers in Russian, attended the Russian cathedral, sat in cafes along the smart Bolshoi Prospekt, and talked endlessly of the war of revenge against Bolshevism. The White community was fractions and diverse, and Soviet agents encouraged their squabbles.
 
 
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Konstantin_Rodzaevsky
    On May 26, 1931, he became the Secretary General of the newly created Russian Fascist Party; in 1934 the Party amalgamated with the Russian Fascist Organization of Anastasy Vonsyatsky, Rodzaevsky becoming its leader. He modeled himself on Benito Mussolini, and also used the Swastika as one of the symbols of the movement.
 
    Rodzaevsky collected around himself personally selected bodyguards, and used symbolism of the former Russian Empire along with Russian nationalist symbols; like the Italian Blackshirts, the Russian Fascists wore black uniforms with black crossed belts; they were armed with weapons obtained from Japan's Imperial Japanese Army. They created an international organization of White émigrés with a central office in Harbin, the "Russian Far East Moscow", and links in twenty-six nations around the world.


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Russian_Fascist_Party
    ...the RFP under Rodzaevsky had grown strong and claimed 20,000 activists by May 1935. Subsidiaries of the RFP were set up - Russian Women's Fascist Movement (RGFD), Fascist Union of Youth, Union of Young Fascists – Vanguard (boys), Union of Young Fascists – Vanguard (girls), Union of Fascist Little Ones. Rodzaevsky's book, The Russian National State, outlined the programme of the party to establish fascism in Russia by May 1, 1938, including a desire to get rid of the Jews
 
    ...By cooperating with Japan, the RFP became the most influential émigré group in Manchukuo, setting up a party school in Harbin in 1932. Rodzaevsky also assisted the Imperial Japanese Army in the formation of the Asano Detachment, the all ethnic Russian special forces in the Kwantung Army
 
 
https://www.cia.gov/library/readingroom/docs/DOC_0000608439.pdf
    In addition, there were numerous anti-Communist White Russians in northern Manchuria willing and able to engage in intelligence activities for the Japanese.
 
    ...The principal field intelligence units under the Intelligence Section of the Kwantung Army staff were eight Army Special Services Agencies. Of these it was the unit in Harbin which played the major role in the Manchurian operations. The Harbin ASSA used White Russians for espionage missions and these were the best of the agents available.
 
    ...The importance of available Soviet publications, primarily newspapers published in the Far East, had somewhat belatedly become apparent to the Japanese, and the few publication analysts originally assigned to the Harbin ASSA had been augmented and formed into the Document Intelligence Division. Its staff included a large number of White Russian intellectuals
 
 
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Norihiro_Yasue
    At the age of 33, Captain Yasue was assigned as part of the Japanese intervention in Siberia, to aid the Russian White Army in their struggle against the Bolshevik Red Army. A Russian-language specialist, he was assigned to the staff of General Gregorii Semenov, a vehement anti-Semite who distributed copies of the Protocols of the Elders of Zion to all of his troops, along with weapons and rations. Along with a few dozen other Japanese soldiers, Yasue read and accepted the premises of the Protocols, and would allow this to guide much of his actions and views into the time of the beginning of World War II.
 
    After his return to Japan in 1922, Yasue worked in the Army Intelligence Bureau, translating the Protocols of the Elders of Zion into Japanese, while continuing to speak with Inuzuka and a handful of others about the Jewish problem in Russia. Their group grew quickly, publishing articles in internal army journals, and holding informal lectures and discussion groups.
 
 
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Koreshige_Inuzuka
    After the war, he was stationed off the coast of Vladivostok during the Siberian Intervention to aid the White Russians against the Bolshevik Red Army. It was there that he first heard of and read the Protocols of the Elders of Zion, a powerful anti-Semitic document detailing a Jewish worldwide conspiracy. The document was forged and distributed by Russian General Gregorii Semenov, a leader of the White forces.
 
    In 1922, after returning to Japan, Inuzuka began to gather a coterie of sympathetic officers who believed in the Protocols. This group of so-called 'Jewish-experts' slowly became larger and more outspoken over the next several years. The group published many documents detailing their thoughts on the Jewish conspiracy, including lists of known Jews, and a Japanese translation of the Protocols
 
    ...As war with China approached in the 1930s, Inuzuka came to support the 'Manchurian faction,' a number of military men who believed that control of Manchuria was crucial to Japan's survival.
 
 
http://imtfe.law.virginia.edu/collections/phelps-collection/2/1/hashimoto-urged-war-manchuria-witness-testifies-news-article
    Hashimoto Urged War in Manchuria, Witness Testifies News Article
 
    "Colonel Chaiki Shigeto and Colonel Kingoro Hashimoto urged 'positive action' be taken in Manchuria." Goes into depth on the discussions surrounding advancement into Manchuria. Subsequent testimony was heard from Ken Inukia, "son of the former Premier who was assassinated..."
 
 
https://trialinternational.org/latest-post/kingoro-hashimoto/
    Hashimoto, as a military leader, is reported to have played a pivotal role in the formulation and execution of a common plan leading Japan to wage wars of aggression to secure its domination of East Asia and the Pacific and Indian Oceans. With that purpose, Hashimoto allegedly participated in the March and October 1931 failed coups to establish a military dictatorship and in the 1932 plot to assassinate Prime Minister Inukai. He repeatedly expressed his public support for a policy of conquest and military expansion and was the founder of several radical right-wing societies within the army.
 

https://www.newspapers.com/newspage/43559422/
    Witness Reveals Militarist's Plan To Seize Control of Japan in 1931

    ...Dr. Shumei Okawa, a defendant in the current trials and now a mental patient, was to have led a mob into the Diet. Okawa, with Col Kingoro Hashimoto (also a defendant) and other army leaders had planned the coup. 


https://www.cia.gov/library/readingroom/docs/DOC_0005403452.pdf
    Segments of the Chinese Nationalist and of the Japan underground government are attempting to implement plans to provoke a third World War.
 
    This is being done in the name of Greater Asian-ism with the purpose of fostering an asiatic race liberation movement and reviving the influence of the Chinese Nationalist Government. OKAWA Shumei reportedly emphasized the fact that only through a third world War can complete independence of Asia be realized.
 
    ...These four men are reported to be planning in secret the reconstruction of the Japanese military. "Their initial aim is the organization of a volunteer corps to join the Chinese Nationalists in their defense of Formosa and then to gradually increase the size and equipment of the group until it becomes a power for those whose service both the East and West will bid prior to the inevitable World War III."
 
    ...In the event of war between the US and the USSR, ultra-rightists OKAWA Shumei, ISHIHARA Kanji and KITA Ikki groups will aid the Soviets.


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kingoro_Hashimoto
    In April 1922, he was assigned to the Kwangtung Army in Manchuria and was stationed at Harbin. In 1923, he was sent on special assignment to Manzhouli, near the border with the Soviet Union. From September 1927 through June 1930, he was reassigned as military attaché to Turkey. On his return to Japan, he was posted to the Imperial Japanese Army General Staff, and headed a Russian studies department.


https://www.newspapers.com/newspage/43559422/
    Later, in August, 1931, Okawa told Shimizu that Okawa and three army colonels including Seishiro Itagaki. vice - chief of staff of the Kwantung army (now a defendant) would bring about an incident in Mukden. It came in September, 1931.
 

https://trialinternational.org/latest-post/kingoro-hashimoto/
    Hashimoto is also said to have plotted the military seizure of Manchuria by participating in the planning of the Mukden incident of 18 September 1931, which provided the pretext for the annexation of the region by Japan a few months later. In that occasion, Japanese militaries orchestrated a fake sabotage to a Japanese railway line in north-eastern China, which was later attributed by the Imperial Army of Japan to Chinese dissident and assumed as justification to invade China. Therefore, Hashimoto was allegedly the major instigator of the second Sino-Japanese war and acted as a commander in the field during the military campaign.
 

https://www.britannica.com/event/Mukden-Incident
    ...Japanese troops used the pretext of an explosion along the Japanese-controlled South Manchurian Railway to occupy Mukden. On September 21, Japanese reinforcements arrived from Korea, and the army began to expand throughout northern Manchuria. In Tokyo neither the high command of the Japanese army nor Prime Minister Wakatsuki Reijirō proved able to restrain the Kwangtung Army in the field, and within three months Japanese troops had spread throughout Manchuria. Wakatsuki’s cabinet fell in December, and its successor reacted to a growing tide of public opinion by sanctioning the invasion.
 
    The Kwantung Army met little resistance in its conquests because Chiang Kai-shek, who was intent on establishing his control over the rest of China, ordered the commander of the Chinese forces in Manchuria, Zhang Xueliang, to pursue a policy of nonresistance and withdrawal. The League of Nations, Chiang announced, would determine the outcome of the case. The Lytton Commission, appointed by the league to investigate the situation, labeled Japan as the aggressor, but Japan withdrew from the league and continued to occupy Manchuria until 1945.


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Battle_of_Shanghai
    The Battle of Shanghai was the first of the twenty-two major engagements fought between the National Revolutionary Army (NRA) of the Republic of China (ROC) and the Imperial Japanese Army (IJA) of the Empire of Japan during the Second Sino-Japanese War. It was one of the largest and bloodiest battles of the entire war, described by Peter Harmsen as "Stalingrad on the Yangtze".

    Since 1931, China and Japan had been embroiled in incessant, smaller conflicts, often known as "incidents," that saw China lose territories piece by piece. ...Although Japan had not formally declared war on China, by August 1937, following the Marco Polo Bridge Incident of July 7 and the ensuing Japanese invasion of North China, a de facto state of war existed between China and Japan.


http://bookfi.net/dl/1026321/4847c5
    The "sleeper" now wakened was a general called Zhang Zhizhong (whom we shall refer to as ZZZ), commander of the Shanghai-Nanjing garrison. In 1925 he had been a teacher at Whampoa, the Russian-funded and Russian-staffed military academy near Canton. From the day of its founding, Moscow made a determined effort to plant high-level agents in the Nationalist military.
 
    ...ZZZ held the pivotal job of chief of the Shanghai-Nanjing garrison. He tried to talk Chiang into launching a "first strike" against Japan--not in northern China, where the fighting was, but 1,000 kilometres to the south, in Shanghai, where the small Japanese garrison was not involved in any military action at this stage. Chiang did not reply to this proposal, even though ZZZ repeated it many times.
 
    ...At the end of July, right after the Japanese occupied Peking and Tianjin, ZZZ cabled Chiang again, arguing strongly for "taking the initiative" to start a war. After ZZZ said he would only do so if the Japanese showed unmistakable signs of attacking Shanghai, Chiang gave his conditional consent, stressing: "You must wait for orders about when this should happen."
 
    But on 9 August, without authorisation, ZZZ staged an incident outside Shanghai airport, where a Chinese army unit, which he himself had specially stationed there, shot dead a Japanese marine lieutenant and a private. A Chinese prisoner under sentence of death was then dressed in a Chinese uniform and shot dead at the airport gate, to make it seem that the Japanese had fired first. The Japanese gave every sign of wishing to defuse the incident, but ZZZ still bombarded Chiang with requests to launch an offensive, which Chiang vetoed. On the morning of the 13th, the Generalissimo told ZZZ not to launch a war "on impulse," but to "study and discuss" all the angles again, and then submit his plan. ZZZ pressed next day: "This army is determined to start the offensive against the enemy at 5 p.m. today Here is the plan. . ." On the 14th, Chinese planes bombed the Japanese flagship Izumo, as well as troops and navy planes on the ground, and ZZZ ordered a general offensive. But Chiang stopped him: "You must not attack this evening. Wait for order."  
 
    When no order arrived, ZZZ outflanked Chiang by issuing a press release next day; claiming, falsely; that Japanese warships had shelled Shanghai and that Japanese troops had started attacking the Chinese. With anti-Japanese feeling running high, Chiang was put on the spot. The following day; 16 August, he finally gave the order: "General assault for dawn tomorrow."
 
    But after one day's fighting, Chiang ordered a halt, on the 18th. ZZZ simply ignored the order and expanded his offensives. All-out war became unstoppable as large Japanese reinforcements began to arrive on 22 August.
 
    The Japanese inflicted tremendous casualties. In Shanghai, 73 of China's 180 divisions--and the best one-third--over 400,000 men, were thrown in, and all but wiped out. The conflict here consumed virtually all of China's nascent air force (which Chiang so treasured that he had not sent a single plane to the northern front), and the main warships. It significantly weakened the military force Chiang had been painstakingly building up since the early 1930S. The Japanese suffered much fewer, though still heavy; casualties: about 40,000.
 
    Once Chiang was forced into all-out war, Stalin moved with alacrity to bolster Chiang's capability to sustain a war. He signed a non-aggression treaty with Nanjing on 21 August, and started to supply Chiang with weapons. China could not manufacture any weapons except rifles. Stalin advanced Chiang U.S. $250 million for arms purchases from Russia, which included 1,000 planes, plus tanks and artillery and committed a sizeable Soviet air force contingent. Moscow sent some 300 military advisers, headed for a time by the Chinese-speaking General Vasili Chuikov, later of Stalingrad fame. For the next four years, Russia was not only China's main supplier of arms, but virtually its only source of heavy weapons, artillery and planes.
 
    Moscow was exhilarated by the turn of events, as the Soviet foreign minister, Maksim Litvinov, admitted to French vice-premier Leon Blum. According to Blum, Litvinov told him that "he [Litvinov] and the Soviet Union were perfectly delighted that Japan had attacked China [adding] that the Soviet Union hoped that way between China and Japan would continue just as long as possible..."


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nanking_Massacre
    The Nanking Massacre was an episode of mass murder and mass rape committed by Japanese troops against the residents of Nanjing (Nanking), then the capital of the Republic of China during the Second Sino-Japanese War. The massacre is also known as the Rape of Nanking or, using Pinyin romanization, the Nanjing Massacre or Rape of Nanjing.


https://books.google.com/books?id=tOPQCwAAQBAJ&pg=PA23&lpg=PA23
    "Communist propaganda,' as the police called it, addressed various issues.  ...Among the publications seized by the police, two focused on the violence in Nanjing: "Japan under the Threat of Fascism" in Far-Eastern War News no. 4 (Janurary 10, 1938), and What War Is. ...The newspaper's editor of the Far-Eastern War News, who learned of the massacre from a New York Times article, briefly informed the readers about violence committed by the Japanese military after the capture of the city. In an item titled "A Matter for Great Regret," he wrote:
 
        At the time the Japanese military captured Nanjing, there were wide-scale looting, rape, and atrocities, which had not been seen in the past. Foreign witnesses were surprised and expressed the opinion that "the battle of Nanjing" would remain not as a brilliant victory in Japanese war history, but as a shameful incident that would "ruin national dignity." It is concluded that the large-scale atrocities that took place in Nanjing can be attributed to a deterioration in military discipline among ordinary soldiers influenced by fascist officers, such as Colonel Hashimoto [Kingoro]


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shiro_Azuma
    When I tried to cut off the first one, either the farmer moved or I mis-aimed. I ended up slicing off just part of his skull. Blood spurted upwards. I swung again... and this time I killed him... We were taught that we were a superior race since we lived only for the sake of a human god—our emperor. But the Chinese were not. So we held nothing but contempt for them... 


https://books.google.com/books?id=wkHyjjbv-yEC&pg=PA246
    While the city was being systematically ravaged, a Japanese colonel named Hashimoto, who belonged to an extremist antiforeign group, set up his heavy artillery to prevent refugees from escaping up the Yangtze River to the west.


http://bookfi.net/dl/1026321/4847c5
    The outbreak of full-scale war between Japan and China brought Mao immediate benefits. Chiang Kai-shek finally acceded to the Communists' key demand, which he had till now refused to consider--that the Red Army could keep its autonomy. Mao thus kept control of his own army, even though it was supposed to be part of the armed forces of the central government. Though Chiang was supreme commander of the Chinese army, he could not give orders to the Red Army, and had to couch his commands in the form of "requests." In addition, the CCP was now in effect, legitimised. Communist prisoners were released and the CCP was allowed to open offices in key cities, and to publish its own papers in Nationalist areas.
 
    And yet this was just the beginning of Mao's gains from the Sino-Japanese War, which lasted eight years and took some 20 million Chinese lives. It ended up weakening Chiang's state enormously, and enabling Mao to emerge in possession of a giant army of 1.3 million. At the beginning of the war, the ratio of Chiang's army to Mao's was 60:1; at the end, it was 3:1.
 
    ...He bombarded his military commanders with telegrams such as: "Focus on creating base areas. . . Not on fighting battles. . ." And when the Japanese were sweeping across the province of Shanxi, he ordered: "Set up our territory in the whole of Shanxi province." He said years later that his attitude had been: "The more land Japan took, the better."


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Soviet_invasion_of_Manchuria
    As agreed with the Allies at the Tehran Conference in November 1943 and the Yalta Conference in February 1945, the Soviet Union entered World War II's Pacific Theater within three months of the end of the war in Europe. The invasion began on 9 August 1945, exactly three months after the German surrender on May 8 (9 May, 0:43 Moscow time).
 
    Although the commencement of the invasion fell between the American atomic bombings of Hiroshima, on 6 August, and only hours before the Nagasaki attack on 9 August, the timing of the invasion had been planned well in advance and was determined by the timing of the agreements at Tehran and Yalta, the long term buildup of Soviet forces in the Far East since Tehran, and the date of the German surrender some three months earlier; on August 3, Marshal Vasilevsky reported to Premier Joseph Stalin that, if necessary, he could attack on the morning of 5 August.
 
    At 11pm Trans-Baikal (UTC+10) time on 8 August 1945, Soviet foreign minister Vyacheslav Molotov informed Japanese ambassador Naotake Satō that the Soviet Union had declared war on the Empire of Japan, and that from August 9 the Soviet government would consider itself to be at war with Japan. At one minute past midnight Trans-Baikal time on 9 August 1945, the Soviets commenced their invasion simultaneously on three fronts to the east, west and north of Manchuria
 
    ...The Imperial Japanese Navy did not contribute to the defense of Manchuria, the occupation of which it had always opposed on strategic grounds. Additionally, by the time of the invasion, the few remnants of its fleet were stationed and tasked with the defense of the Japanese home island in the event of an invasion by American forces.
 
    Compounding the problem, the Japanese military made many wrong assumptions and major mistakes, the two most significant being:
 
    - They wrongly assumed that any attack coming from the west would follow either the old railway line to Hailar, or head into Solun from the eastern tip of Mongolia. The Soviets did attack along those routes, but their main attack from the west went through the supposedly impassable Greater Khingan range south of Solun and into the center of Manchuria.
 
    - Japanese military intelligence failed to determine the nature, location and scale of the Soviet buildup in the Far East. Based on initial underestimates of Soviet strength, and the monitoring of Soviet traffic on the Trans-Siberian railway, they believed the Soviets would not have sufficient forces in place before the end of August, and that an attack was most likely in autumn 1945 or in the spring of 1946.
 
    ...However, although this redeployment had been initiated, it was not due to be completed until September, and hence the Kwantung Army were in the midst of redeploying when the Soviets launched their attack simultaneously on all three fronts.
 
    ...The invasion of Manchuria contributed to the surrender of Japan and the end of World War II. In addition, the Soviet occupation of Manchuria, along with the northern portions of the Korean Peninsula allowed for those regions to be transferred by the Soviet Union into the control of communist backed regimes. The control of these regions by communist governments backed by Soviet authorities would aid in the rise of Communist China and shape the political conflict of the Korean War.
 
    ...Many Japanese settlers committed mass suicide as the Soviet army approached. Mothers were forced to kill their own children before killing or being killed themselves. The Japanese army often took part in the killings of its civilians. The commander of the 5th Japanese Army, General Shimizu, commented that "each nation lives and dies by its own laws." Wounded Japanese soldiers who were incapable of moving on their own were often left to die as the army retreated.
 
    The Soviets laid claim to Japanese enterprises in the region and took valuable materials and industrial equipment.
 
    British and US reports indicate that the Soviet troops that occupied Manchuria (about 700,000) looted and terrorized the people of Mukden, and were not discouraged by Soviet authorities from "three days of rape and pillage". In Harbin, Chinese posted slogans such as "Down with Red Imperialism!" Soviet forces ignored protests from Chinese communist party leaders on the mass rape and looting.
 
 
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chinese_Civil_War#Resumed_fighting_.281946.E2.80.931949.29
    By the end of the Second Sino-Japanese War, the balance of power in China's civil war had shifted in favor of the Communists. Their main force grew to 1.2 million troops, with a militia of 2 million. Their "Liberated Zone" contained 19 base areas, including one-quarter of the country's territory and one-third of its population; this included many important towns and cities. Moreover, the Soviet Union turned over all of its captured Japanese weapons and a substantial amount of their own supplies to the Communists, who received Northeastern China from the Soviets as well.
 
    In March 1946, despite repeated requests from Chiang, the Soviet Red Army under the command of Marshal Malinovsky continued to delay pulling out of Manchuria while Malinovsky secretly told the CPC forces to move in behind them, which led to full-scale war for the control of the Northeast. These favorable conditions also facilitated many changes inside the Communist leadership: the more hard-line faction finally gained the upper hand and defeated the opportunists. Prior to giving control to Communist leaders, on March 27 Soviet diplomats requested a joint venture of industrial development with the Nationalist Party in Manchuria.
 
    Although General Marshall stated that he knew of no evidence that the CPC was being supplied by the Soviet Union, the CPC was able to utilize a large number of weapons abandoned by the Japanese, including some tanks


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Liaoshen_Campaign
    After the winter offensive of 1947 in Manchuria, the PLA had expanded into 13 infantry armies, one artillery army, 15 independent divisions as well as 3 cavalry divisions, approximately 54 divisions consisting of over 700,000 men in a field army. The Communist forces also had approximately 300,000 irregulars, effectively controlling 97% percent of the land and 86% of the population in Manchuria by August 1948. While the Nationalist government still had a strength of 44 divisions, a total of 550,000 men including the police force, the PLA had reached numerical superiority.
 
    The Nationalist forces were isolated in Shenyang, Changchun and Jinzhou, none of which were connected to each other. In addition, the PLA had control of Jingha Railway, cutting off the supply line to Shenyang and Changchun. Since the supplies had to be airlifted with enormous difficulties, the Nationalist government were prepared to retreat from Changchun and Shenyang and withdraw to Jinzhou when necessary to prevent the PLA forces in Manchuria from entering Shanhai Pass.


http://www.nytimes.com/2009/10/02/world/asia/02anniversary.html
    CHANGCHUN, China — Unlike in other cities taken by the People’s Liberation Army during China’s civil war, there were no crowds to greet the victors as they made their triumphant march through the streets of this industrial city in the heart of Manchuria.
 
    Even if relieved to learn that hostilities with Chiang Kai-shek’s Nationalist Army had come to an end, most residents — the ones who had not died during the five-month siege — were simply too weak to go outdoors. “We were just lying in bed starving to death,” said Zhang Yinghua, now 86, as she recalled the famine that claimed the lives of her brother, her sister and most of her neighbors. “We couldn’t even crawl.”
 
    ...The 40,000 who survived did so by eating insects, leather belts and, in some cases, the bodies that littered the streets. By the time Communist troops took over the city, every leaf and blade of grass had been consumed during the final desperate months.
 
    ...Lung Ying-tai, a University of Hong Kong professor who studied the siege of Changchun, said nearly every elderly army officer she interviewed for her book about the civil war, “Big River, Big Sea — Untold Stories of 1949,” broke down when recounting what he experienced. “It’s an unspeakable national trauma that has not once been opened up and gently treated for 60 years,” she said.
 
    The book, which was published last month in Taiwan and promptly banned on the mainland, seeks to portray the horror of the civil war through the stories of those who survived. “There are not too many left who can clearly remember,” she said.
 
    The elderly survivors who gather in Changchun’s Labor Park most days are not eager to tell their tales. But after some prompting, the details spill out. They describe babies too weak to cry, brides sold for a morsel of food and the milewide no man’s land where thousands perished in full view of troops under orders from Gen. Lin Biao to turn Changchun into a “dead city.”
 

https://www.cia.gov/library/readingroom/docs/DOC_0000253617.pdf
    Central Intelligence Agency
    Intelligence Report
    The Purge of Lin Piao's "Conspiratorial Clique": A Tentative Reconstruction
    July 1972
 
    This Staff has received constructive comment on this study from a number of other offices of the Central Intelligence Agency, all of whom agree on the credibility of the essentials of the CCP's case against Lin, and several of whom agree in general with other findings of this study.
 
    ...Lin and his proteges had concluded correctly that it was Mao's intention ultimately to purge them. To prevent this and to secure the succession, Lin's group planned a military "coup" against Mao, one which envisaged Mao's assassination if necessary. ...When Lin's plans for a coup were frustrated, he attempted to flee to the USSR


http://www.nytimes.com/2009/10/02/world/asia/02anniversary.html
    ...In the first few months of the siege, food could be purchased, albeit at exorbitant prices. By the end of the summer, people were trading thick gold rings for a biscuit.
 
    “At first we ate rotten sorghum, then corncobs and then the bark off the trees,” said Meng Qinghua, 85. “After a week of not eating you’d get very sleepy. Once that happened, you would start to die.”
 
    The few airdrops of aid, delivered by American planes, were quickly gobbled up by Nationalist troops. When those stopped, the soldiers stole food from civilians at gunpoint. In the poorer quarters of the city, according to “White Snow, Red Blood,” 9 of 10 families were wiped out.
 
    Although her family was relatively well off, Zhang Yinghua said there was nothing to be bought by the end of summer. They opened their pillows and consumed the corn husk filling. Later they boiled and ate leather.
 
    Then 25, Ms. Zhang understood that swallowing such unpalatable matter was the only way to survive. “Every day we would eat a spoonful, just enough to maintain the flicker of life, but the children would not,” she said. When her 6-year-old sister and her 9-year-old brother finally died, her parents, barely able to stand, dragged their bodies to the street.
 

http://community.seattletimes.nwsource.com/archive/?date=19901122&slug=1105487
    Zhang said the Communist army's decision to surround the city in May 1948 was accompanied by an order prohibiting civilians from leaving, in order to put maximum pressure on the Nationalists' grain reserves.
 
    He cited a report from a People's Liberation Army officer filed Sept. 9, 1948, saying Communist troops were shooting and beating fleeing residents, who at times were seen ``throwing their babies behind them in order to escape the city.''
 
    ``Not allowing the starving city residents to leave and sending other starving citizens back into the city has become difficult to explain to the troops,'' the officer's report says.
 
    The author quoted cables from other officers asking that the army be allowed to save starving people. The requests were denied, he wrote.
 
    At one point, thousands of residents were caught between the two forces. All food in the city had been requisitioned by the Nationalists, and the Communists refused to let the civilians pass, so they died there, slowly, the book says.
 
    ``Changchun was like Hiroshima,'' Zhang wrote. ``The casualties were about the same. Hiroshima took nine seconds; Changchun took five months.''
 
 
http://www.nytimes.com/2009/10/02/world/asia/02anniversary.html
    Some of those charged with enforcing the blockade have come to regret their participation. Wang Junru said he was 15 when the Communists forced him to join a militia for teenagers. Later, he joined 170,000 other soldiers ordered to drive back hungry civilians. “We were told they were the enemy and they had to die,” he said.
 
    ...Now 76 and embittered, he said young people should learn about what happened in Changchun — and during the rest of the civil war. “They only know the propaganda,” he said. “Maybe if they know how horrible war is, they can try to avoid it in the future.”