https://vault.fbi.gov/rosenberg-case/rosenberg-sobell-committe/rosenber-sobell-committee-part-1
	FIRST UNITARIAN CHURCH OF LOS ANGELES

	A source advised on May 11, 1964, that the premises of the First Unitarian Church of Los Angeles have been utilized for meetings by Communist Party members and sympathizers over a period of years. Speakers and lecturers at the church frequently espouse Communist causes or, follow the Communist Party line. Communist front group literature is distributed at the church. The church is used by some Communist Party members for "mass concentration" Work. This same infiltration extends to adjuncts of the church such as the Unitarian Public Forum and the Unitarian Universalist Fellowship for Social Justice. STEPHEN H. FRITCHMAN has been minister of the church since 1918. Reverend STEPHEN H. FRITCHMAN is described in the Fourth Report, Un-American Activities Committee in California, 1948, page 115, as a very active "Communist fronter" and connected with numerous "Communist front organizations and activities." Membership in the First Unitarian Church does not of itself connote membership in or sympathy with the Communist Party.


on "red churches"

http://www.uuworld.org/articles/challenging-surveillance-state

still a KGB front?


------


sword and sheild:


Probably the most important Line PR postgraduate at a 
British university in the mid-1960s was Gennadi 
Fedorovich Titov (codenamed SILIN), who studied at 
University College, London. Titov went on to become 
resident in Norway in 1971 at the relatively youthful age 
of thirty-nine; in 1984 he was promoted to the rank of 
KGB general, and by the time of the 1991 coup ranked 
third in the KGB hierarchy. KGB officers and agents 
disguised as students were also used to uncover links 
between Western church groups and religious minorities 
in the Soviet Union. In September 1970 ABRAMOV (not 
identified in Mitrokhin’s notes) enrolled at a Baptist 
college in England, where he made contacts who revealed 
plans in Sweden and West Germany to smuggle religious 
literature into Russia by car, hidden in specially 
constructed secret compartments. 


...

Sixteen Labor MPs signed a motion “marveling at the 
innocence” of Stockwood’s understanding of Communist 
regimes. Another fifty backbenchers supported a motion 
supporting the archbishops against his criticisms. One told 
the Guardian, “The Marxists seem now to have 
penetrated the higher echelons of the established 
Church.”^^ The Soviet embassy, possibly on the initiative 
of the residency, established what a KGB file describes as 
“close contact” with Stockwood. 


...

In 1961, with the KGB’s blessing, the Orthodox 
Church joined the World Council of Churches (WCC). At 
that very moment Khrushchev was in the midst of a 
ferocious anti-religious campaign which closed down 
many of the reopened churches, monasteries and 
seminaries and disbanded half the Orthodox parishes. The 
KGB was simultaneously seeking to strengthen its grip on 
the churches which remained. According to a secret KGB 
directive of 1961: 

Up to 600 individuals are studying in the two 
ecclesiastical academies of the Moscow Patriarchate 
and the five ecclesiastical seminaries. These must be 



exploited in the interests of the KGB. We must 
infiltrate our people among the students of these 
ecclesiastical training establishments so that they 
will subsequently influence the state of affairs within 
the Russian Orthodox Church and exert influence on 
the believers.

The head of the Second Chief Directorate, General Oleg 
Mikhailovich Gribanov, reported in 1962 that over the 
previous two years the KGB had infiltrated “reliable 
agents” into the leading positions of the Moscow 
Patriarchate, the Catholic dioceses, the Armenian 
Gregorian Church and other religious groups. These, he 
predicted, would make it possible to remove remaining 
“reactionary Church and sectarian authorities” from their 
posts.


...

It would be both simplistic and unjust to see all the 
KGB’s agents and co-optees in the Orthodox Church and 
the WCC simply as cynical careerists with no real 
religious faith — though that may have been true of a 
minority. Most Russian Orthodox priests probably 
believed they had no option but to accept some of the 
demands of state security. One of the best-known 
dissident priests of the 1970s, Father Dmitri Dudko, later 
declared: 


One hundred percent of the clergy were forced to 



cooperate to some extent with the KGB and pass on 
some sort of information — otherwise they would 
have been deprived of the possibility to work in a 
parish. 

A minority, however, did successfully resist all the 
pressure placed on them by the KGB. In December 1991, 
shortly before the dissolution of the Soviet Union, the last 
deputy chairman of the KGB, Anatoli Oleinikov, told an 
interviewer that, of the Russian Orthodox priests 
approached by the KGB, 15 to 20 percent had refused to 
work for it.^^ The courageous minority who resisted all 
KGB pressure were inevitably denied advancement. The 
section of the Orthodox Church most compromised by its 
association with the KGB was its hierarchy. 


...


Looking back on his career in the KGB, Oleg Kalugin 
concludes that, like “the stranglehold over the Church 
inside the Soviet Union,” the penetration and exploitation 
of the Russian Orthodox Church abroad was “one of the 
most sordid and little known chapters in the history of our 
organization.”^^ Mitrokhin came to the same conclusion, 
commenting at one point in his notes that the files 
contained “a whirlpool of filth. The KGB used its 
agents among Russian Orthodox clergy in the West not 
merely to spy on emigre communities but also to identify 
possible agent recruits. Though the Russian Orthodox 
Church in north America was split, the faction which 
remained loyal to the Moscow Patriarchate was, 
according to Kalugin, “riddled with KGB agents. 
Among the agents identified in the files noted by 
Mitrokhin was a cleric codenamed PETROV, who was 
sent to north America in the 1970s. His case officers in 
north America contacted him by using the passwords 
“Pyotr Mikhailovich,” the first name and patronymic of 
his Fifth Directorate controller in Moscow. 

The file on Arkadi Rodyonovich Tyshchuk 
(VORONOV), a priest who was posted to the Nikolsky 
Russian Orthodox cathedral in New York from 1977 to 
1982, contains evidence of a hostility to the United States 
which may also have helped to motivate other Orthodox 
priests in the KGB’s north American network. The United 
States, VORONOV told his KGB case officer, suffered 



from the sin of pride — “and pride comes before a fall:” 


When a country declares itself to be the most 
powerful and the richest, and that its government is 
the smartest and possesses the best weapons — that is 
not maturity, it is bragging, and is the reason for the 
downfall of all the powerful nations of the past. 

VORONOV usually met his controller from the New 
York residency either at the Soviet mission to the United 
Nations, where he went to collect his correspondence 
from Russia, or on board the ship Mikhail Lermontov, 
which regularly came into port at New York. More 
difficult to explain than his hostility to the United States 
was his apparent admiration for the KGB which, 
according to his file, he bizarrely described as a “good 
shepherd” and a “true Russian spiritual guardian and 
shepherd. 

Russian Orthodox priests in the West were also used by 
FCD Directorate S to collect material for use in devising 
the well-documented legends of KGB illegals. In the early 
1970s, for example, two KGB agents in the Moscow 
Patriarchate were sent to carry out detailed research on 
parish registers in Canada. Ivan Grigoryevich Borcha 
(codenamed FYODOR), who worked as a priest in prairie 
parishes of Ukrainian and Romanian communities, 
studied registers in Alberta and Saskatchewan. Viktor 
Sergeyevich Petlyuchenko (PATRIOT), who was 



assigned to Orthodox parishes in Edmonton, carried out 
further research in Alberta. 


...


As well as giving higher priority to operations against 
the Vatican, Andropov also stepped up the persecution of 
the Ukrainian Uniates. In 1969 the head of the 
underground church, Bishop Velychkovsky, was arrested 
and sentenced to three years’ imprisonment. The KGB 
reported that his arrest “greatly helped to achieve a 
psychological breakthrough in the mind of SERAFIM,” 
another leading figure in the Uniate underground, who 
was recruited as a KGB agent. According to Mitrokhin’s 
notes on his file: 

SERAFIM explained in detail by whom, when and in 
what circumstances he was tasked to direct monks 
illegally; he reported incidents of criminal 
organizational activity by Bishop Velychkovsky and 
his close contacts; he reported on the situation 
among underground orders of monks . . . and he 
drew up a list of Uniate priests operating illegally. 
SERAFIM’S answers were recorded covertly on 
tape. 

Though SERAFIM agreed to “cooperate secretly” with 
the KGB, he refused to sign the written undertaking 
required of most informers. His controller did not insist, 
on the grounds that it would represent too great “a 
psychological trial for a man of religion” and leave him in 
fear of “divine punishment in the next world.” Another 
agent, terrified of “being cast into Hell,” had once begged 
the controller, on bended knee, to return his signed 
undertaking.

...

The Russian Orthodox Church, however, continued to 
be haunted by its past history of KGB penetration. After 
the failure of the August coup in 1991, the Russian 
government’s Committee on Freedom of Conscience, 
which included Father Gleb Yakunin, was given access to 
a section of the KGB archives which showed that some 
members of the Orthodox hierarchy had been KGB 
agents. After Yakunin published a selection of the 
documents, the archives were closed once more; he was 
accused of having betrayed state secrets to the United 
States and threatened with a private prosecution. 
Father Gleb remained defiant. He wrote to the Patriarch in 
January 1994: 



If the Church is not cleansed of the taint of the spy 
and informer, it cannot be reborn. Unfortunately, 
only one archbishop — Archbishop Khrizostom of 
Lithuania — has had the courage publicly to 
acknowledge that in the past he worked as an agent, 
and has revealed his codename: RESTAVRATOR. 
No other Church hierarch has followed his example, 
however. 

...


The Centre’s main problems 
came from other Christian churches and a courageous 
minority of Orthodox priests who demanded an end to 
religious persecution. For freedom of religion to make 



progress within the Soviet Union, however, persecuted 
Christians required strong support from the worldwide 
church — in particular from the World Council of 
Churches. They did not receive it. KGB agents in the 
WCC were remarkably successful in persuading it to 
concentrate on the sins of the imperialist West rather than 
religious persecution in the Soviet Bloc. In 1975 agent 
ADAMANT (Metropolitan Nikodim) was elected as one 
of the WCC’s six presidents. 

The importance attached by the KGB to controlling 
religious dissent and denying persecuted Soviet Christians 
support from the West was fiilly justified by events in 
Poland, where SB penetration never succeeded in 
bringing the Catholic Church under political control. By 
the early 1970s the KGB had already identified Karol 
Wojtyla, Archbishop of Krakow, as a potentially 
dangerous opponent, unwilling to compromise on either 
religious freedom or human rights. Though the SB wanted 
to arrest him, it dared not risk the outcry which would 
result in both Poland and the West. Wojtyla’ s election as 
Pope John Paul II in 1978 dealt the Polish Communist 
regime, and ultimately the cohesion of the Soviet Bloc, a 
blow from which they never recovered. During his 
triumphant tour of Poland in 1979, the contrast between 
the discredited Communist regime and the immense 
moral authority of the first Polish Pope was plain for all to 
see.


...




------

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unitarian_Universalism


seems sketchy


https://www.kgbreport.com/archives/2011/06/al-franken-addresses-the-unitarian-universalists.shtml

no kidding!


------


http://spartacus-educational.com/Noel_Field.htm
	As Harvey Klehr and John Earl Haynes, Venona: Decoding Soviet Espionage in America (2000) have pointed out: " Field was not new to Soviet and Communist clandestine work. 

	...In 1941 Field became director of the American Unitarian Universalist Service Committee's relief mission in Marseilles. In this role he helped Jewish refugees to escape to Switzerland.

	...Noel Field now became a relief worker, handling Eastern European refugees for the Unitarian Universalist Service Committee (UUSC). It soon became clear that Field was only interested in helping pro-Russian refugees. His superiors protested by cable. "Charity in present day Europe," answered Field, "cannot be neutral. Never have I had so clear a conscience.. and such a harmonious feeling of concord between my convictions and my obligations to suffering mankind."


https://books.google.com/books?id=qCAVQ_cdomcC&pg=PA214
	Henry Ware's name never surfaced publicly during the investigations into Soviet espionage. Even though the FBI briefly investigated him, he escaped intense surveillance and personal or professional problems. He had been, however, a useful KGB source for a period.

	...A 1948 KGB memo on Ware stated: "In '35, he was recruited by the OO NKVD USSR to cover the American colony in the Soviet Union." The OO NKVD was the "special department" of the NKVD (predecessor to the KGB) that conducted internal counterintelligence. In other words, Ware was an informant reporting on fellow Americans in Moscow.

	...A founder of the Fairfax Unitarian Universalist Church, president of the Friends of the Library, and an adviser to the Boy Scouts, he died in 1999.



------

http://www.uuworld.org/articles/obamas-uu-connection

as if they want you to know


------


http://www.phoenixuu.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/05/UUCP-Ministers-Bios.pdf


http://oasis.lib.harvard.edu/oasis/deliver/~div00711
	This collection consists of Call's diaries, letters, sermons, interviews, an unpublished manuscript for a book, documents from his ministry, and a scrapbook. Some of the subjects Call was interested in are the intersection between religion and public politics during the Cold War era, psychology, and aging. These topics are reflected in a number of his sermons and writings, such as "The Pulpit and Politics" (box 3, folder 18); "What Should We Demand of Our Religion?" (box 4, folder 1); "America and Russia: Can They Ever Be Friends?" (box 4, folder 1); "Religion and Public Education" (box 4, folder 2); "Psychiatry: Friend or Foe of Religion" (box 4, folder 2); "Communism, the Congress and the Clergy"


this guy is suspicious


http://libcom.org/book/export/html/50992
	Goodbye, Fellow Worker Jennie Cedervall

	An obituary of Jennie Cedervall, a longtime IWW member.

	The IWW recently learned of the passing of longtime member and supporter, Jennie Cedervall, who died in Willoughby, Ohio, on January 22, 2009, at the age of 95. Born as Eugenia Anekite near Montreal, Canada to Romanian immigrants and IWW members George Anekite and Victoria nee Galason (Galtzan), she moved as a child with her family to Minnesota where she lived on a farm, and then to Detroit, where she worked as a book keeper at the Mt. Elliot Coal Company, which housed IWW workers.

	FW Cedervall later worked as a stenographer, and was involved with several IWW locals in Detroit and Cleveland over the years. While she was not getting the publicity reserved for other members of the union, FW Cedervall nevertheless contributed tirelessly to the union and helped to keep the organization running through some bleak times. She met her future husband, IWW organizer Frank Cedervall, at an IWW event in Michigan, and later relocated with him to Cleveland, where some of the IWW’s most important work took place with the Metal and Machinery Workers Industrial Union from the 1930s into the 1950s. During the 1970s, she drove with her husband on an IWW speaking tour through the West Coast of the United States.

	Jennie and her husband retired to Willoughby, Ohio, while continuing their union support. FW Cedervall was able to attend the IWW’s Centenary event in Pittsburgh in 2005, where she was recognized for her many contributions to the union. She stressed that while it is important to have a vision of a better world with a radical analysis, this is of little importance if it is not put to practical use, through bread and butter gains for workers.

	FW Cedervall contributed her time in her later years to many organizations, including the Clean City Association of Willoughby, Edison Elementary School, and the Lake County Historical Society. Services were held for her at the DavisBabcock Funeral Home, with Rev. Arthur Severance of the East Shore Unitarian Universalist Church. 



http://www.legacy.com/obituaries/seattletimes/obituary.aspx?n=olga-penrose&pid=132056320
	Olga PENROSE Olga Penrose, 83, of Bellevue, Washington passed away August 26th, 2009. Born in Seattle, the daughter of Mitchell and Fenia (Pogriebnikoff) Farafontoff. She was not allowed in school because she did not speak English, and so learned English as a second language. She ended up being the Russian teacher on the eastside for over 20 years. Graduated West Seattle High School where she met the love of her life, and best friend Gilbert Penrose. They were married over 40 years. Member of ADK Sorority, the Seattle Rose Society and the founding member Tashkent Sister Cities. She organized and led numerous tours to Russia and Europe with students, parents and educators, and then led 2 tours with People to People to China with Business Professionals. Her interests include fishing, camping, skiing, soccer, traveling, cooking, dancing, opera, symphonies, roses, and piano playing. Olga is survived by 3 children, Steve Penrose, Barbara Penrose, and Marina (Juan) Corona. 7 Grandchildren + 1 sister Tanya Romanoff. She was preceded in death by her parents, husband Gilbert and brother Nicholas. Memorial Service 4 pm. Friday Sept. 4th at the East Shore Unitarian Church, 12700 SE 32nd St. Bellevue, WA In lieu of flowers, donations can be made to the Alzheimer's Association. To share online memories, visit WWW. MEM. COM Arrangements entrusted to Sunset Hills Funeral Home (425)746-1400. 



https://www.newspapers.com/newspage/64194007/
	2 NEWS-HERALD Sf Oct. 26, IMV Professor to speak Church sets talk ; At Mentor Baptist Church 19 Service to be led by missionary i on l tie minister Lir Daniel H. PovstL staff mem- Germany, evangelistic campaigns on the continent of Europe and an extensive ministry in clothing and feeding Europe's thousands of refu- s bar of Pocket Testament League, speaks Thurs- " h. day at Mentor Baptist Church. The mid - week service begins at 7:80 p.m. education at the University of Maryland (European Branch) and has studied the German language at Goethe University In Frankfort, Germany. AFTER HIS ordination, he sians who fled their Communistic homeland during the Revolution and World War IX. During the past seven years, Mr. Poysti has conducted a youth Bible conference in went to Europe as a missionary. In the course of three terms on the field, he has ministered in most of the European countries. He has conducted evangelistic and teaching services among Rus A native of - Ussurisk, Siberia, Russia, Mr. Poysti as a youth crossed Russia and Siberia three times with bis parents who were eft- Dr. Henry P. Foramer, professor of English at Allegheny College, will be guest speaker tomorrow at East Shore Unitarian Church in Mentor. Dr. Fommer will discuss "The Minister As Means and End" Dr. Pommer, who has authored many articles and books on American literature, received bis A.B. degree in English from the University of Pennsylvania and earned his doctorate in English at Yale University. He was ordained a Unitarian Universalis! minister in DR. HENRY POMMER Elmer Burrall will speak, show slides to Lutherans HE HAS HAD a wide ministry to Slavic people all over the world. With his anility to speak English, Swedish, Russian and German, he seldom ran into an audience where be could not make the message of the Gospel known. In 1962 and 1963, Mr. Poysti traveled in file Soviet Union, visiting some of the Swarthmore College and Cornell University before assuming his post at Allegheny College