

https://books.google.com/books/about/Blowing_up_Russia.html
	Alexander Litvinenko

	...Responding to Basaev’s occupation of the hospital, the Russian special operations squad Alpha had already taken the first floor of the building and was on the point of freeing the hostages and disposing of the terrorists, when Russian Prime Minister Chernomyrdin, who had undertaken to mediate, judged correctly that the Chechens had been “dumped out of order.” He promised to start peace talks immediately, insisted on a halt to the operation to free the hostages and guaranteed Basaev’s men an unhindered withdrawal to Chechnya. There was another chance to liberate the hostages and eliminate Basaev’s men on their way home, with the interior forces special subunit Vityaz standing by, simply waiting for the order. However, the order was not given: Chernomyrdin had given Basaev certain guarantees, and he had to keep his word.

	..."The Kremlin knew that Dagestan was about to be invaded by the Wahhabists. They could not not have known it. They were warned about it by the secret services. Even “Versiya” wrote about it. So why did they blow it? Because there are people in the Kremlin who seriously believe that individuals such as Basaev can be paid to do anything that Moscow tells them...."


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shamil_Basayev
	...The Russian government newspaper Rossiyskaya Gazeta reported that Basayev was an agent of GRU, and another publication by journalist Boris Kagarlitsky said that "It is maintained, for example, that Shamil Basayev and his brother Shirvani are long-standing GRU agents, and that all their activities were agreed, not with the radical Islamists, but with the generals sitting in the military intelligence offices. All the details of the attack by Basayev's detachments were supposedly worked out in the summer of 1999 in a villa in the south of France with the participation of Basayev and the Head of the Presidential administration, Aleksandr Voloshin. Furthermore, it is alleged that the explosive materials used were not supplied from secret bases in Chechnya but from GRU stockpiles near Moscow." The Russian newspaper Novaya Gazeta stated that the Basayev brothers "both recruited as agents by the Main Intelligence Directorate of the Russian General Staff (GRU) in 1991–92." The Russian newspaper Versiya published the GRU file on Basayev and his brother, which revealed that "both Chechen terrorists were named as regular agents of the military intelligence organization."

	Russian special forces joined with the Chechens under Basayev to attack Georgia. A GRU agent, Anton Surikov, had extensive connections with Basayev. Russian military intelligence had ordered Basayev to support the Abkhaz.

	Basayev received direct military training from the GRU since the Abkhaz were backed by Russia. Other Chechens also were trained by the GRU in warfare, many of these Chechens who fought for the Russians in Abkhazia against Georgia had fought for Azerbaijan against Armenia in the Nagorno-Karabakh war.


https://jamestown.org/program/russias-dangerous-ambitions-in-the-caucasus/
	In fact, it was not Abkhazians who fought in that army, but detachments and battalions of mercenaries, created by the Russian intelligence services from the ranks of the Chechens, Ossetians, Ingush, and even the Transdniester Cossacks. But the military success of these mercenaries sharply increased separatist moods among all the Muslim peoples of the Caucasus, including those on Russian territory who joined the so-called Confederation of Mountain Peoples.

	This Confederation declarated in October 1992 that after the defeat of Georgian troops, it would strive for the destabilization of Russia and the independence of the Russian mountain peoples from Moscow. This declaration elicited a harshly-negative reaction from the Kremlin, and an immediate cutback of Russian military aid to the Abkhazian independence movement, which led to its suffering one defeat after another at the hands of the Georgian army. But after Moscow received assurances that the Confederation of Mountain Peoples would not interfere in its affairs, military aid to the Abkhazian fighters was quickly resumed and the mercenaries fighting on its side, in the course of a few weeks, controlled almost the entire western part of Georgia, and began to approach Georgia’s second most important city, Kutaisi. 


https://jamestown.org/program/peacekeepers-or-provocateurs-kremlin-backed-chechen-troops-raise-tensions-in-abkhazia-and-south-ossetia/
	Gelayev had already fought on the separatist side in Abkhazia in the civil war of 1992-93 as part of Musa Shanibov’s Confederation of the Mountain Peoples of the Caucasus (CMPC). In 2003, thousands of volunteers from the North Caucasus played a large part in driving the poorly trained Georgian army from Abkhazia while inflicting heavy casualties. One of Gelayev’s CMPC comrades was the late Shamil Basaev, who later suggested the volunteers may have been misused—“It was in Russia’s interest to have the Abkhaz-Georgian conflict grow into war so that both sides would be brought to their knees”


https://books.google.com/books/about/Blowing_up_Russia.html
	Alexander Litvinenko

	...Military intelligence engages in operational activity, both inside and outside Russia, and it has its own staff of secret agents. The 8th Army Corps was stationed at Volgograd, had fought in Chechnya, and was especially active in recruiting agents among the Chechens. Shamil Basaev underwent training at the GRU firing range in Volgograd before the conflict between Georgia and Abkhazia, and it was military intelligence that trained him.


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shamil_Basayev
	...Researcher Henry Plater-Zyberk has described Litvinenko as "a one man disinformation bureau" who was hungry for attention and provided little, if any, evidence for his claims.


&nbsp;


http://www.worldcat.org/title/us-russia-strategic-relations-obama-and-biden-visit-moscow-tbilisi-and-kiev-planned-contradictions/oclc/461265694
	Henry Plater-Zyberk

	With the election of Barack Obama, Moscow expected that US foreign policy would change, despite Obama's links with Zbigniew Brzezinski, President Carter's National Security Adviser, seen in Moscow not only as anti-Soviet but also as anti-Russian, and with Michael McFaul, a noted authority on Russia. Russia was ready to improve relations with the USA and the West as a whole.


https://www.theguardian.com/world/gallery/2008/aug/08/georgia.russia
	August 8 2008

	Russia invades Georgia



https://ssi.armywarcollege.edu/pubs/people.cfm?authorID=928
	Russia's Contribution as a Partner in the War on Terrorism
	July 08, 2014

	Authored by Mr. Henry Plater-Zyberk.

	Russia and the United States have a common interest in fighting the threat of Islamist terrorism. In practice, however, efforts to achieve cooperation in this area have been hampered by differing concepts of terror and how to counter it, and institutional and procedural incompatibility between the two nations. This monograph explores counter-terrorism from a Russian viewpoint, in order to assess prospects for meaningful practical cooperation in this field with the United States.


https://archive.org/stream/TheWorldWasGoingOurWayTheKGBAndTheBattleForTheTheThirdWorld/The%20World%20Was%20Going%20Our%20Way_djvu.txt
	In 1970 Haddad was recruited by the KGB as Agent NATSIONALIST. Andropov reported to Brezhnev in May:

		The nature of our relations with W. Haddad enables us to control the external operations of the PFLP to a certain degree, to exert influence in a manner favourable to the Soviet Union, and also to carry out active measures in support of our interests through the organization’s assets while observing the necessary conspiratorial secrecy


https://www.washingtonpost.com/archive/politics/1977/11/03/terrorist-leader-expelled/abb85eaf-df05-4824-8792-4af3339cfd70/
	The Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine announced yesterday it has expelled Dr. Wadi Haddad, the reputed mastermind of international terrorism.

	...Habash insists that hijacking was used by the group only to gain attention and after a multiple hijack staged in 1970 it served no more useful purpose. Apparently Haddad still favored the tactic.

	The two physicians-turned-guerrillas held the top posts for years in te PFLP, the Marxist maverick within Yasser Arafat's guerrilla movement. Habash served as the leader, top decision maker and ideological theoretician, while Haddad headed PFLP's foreign operations bureau, which staged some of the world's most spectacular terror operations.


&nbsp;


http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/crime/government-u-turn-on-inquiry-into-alexander-litvinenko-poisoning-9622012.html
	The Government ramped up pressure on Russia today by announcing a public inquiry into the poisoning of former KGB officer Alexander Litvinenko – after previously refusing such calls on grounds of “international relations”.

	...Experts expressed scepticism about the Government’s assertion that the timing of the announcement was unrelated to attempts to increase pressure on Vladimir Putin following the downing of the Malaysia Airlines passenger jet over Ukraine. Whitehall officials said it was only announced yesterday to ensure the process was started before MPs’ summer recess began.

	“No one in Russia will be thinking this is accidental and it probably isn’t,” said Henry Plater-Zyberk, a senior research fellow at the Prague Security Studies Institute. “I think it comes out as a cheap shot.”


https://www.files.ethz.ch/isn/94470/07_May_22.pdf
	Misunderstanding Russia: Alexander Litvinenko

	Henry Plater-Zyberk

	Almost every anti-Putin conspiracy theory is given a wide media coverage in the UK, with few attempts to analyse it or test the credibility of its suppliers.

	...Litvinenko was a one-man disinformation bureau, initially possibly guided by Berezovsky and then increasingly in pursuit of attention. His accusation that Putin ordered a series of bombings in autumn 1999 had no foundation but sounded credible to our media, unaccustomed as it was to the Russian chaos and increasingly addicted to conspiracy theories.



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mikhail_Trepashkin
	Mikhail Trepashkin started working for the KGB in 1984 as an investigator of underground trade in stolen art. At the beginning of the 1990s, Trepashkin moved to the Internal Affairs department of the FSB, where he worked for Nikolai Patrushev. He investigated connections of FSB officers with criminal groups. He won a medal for intercepting a plane-load of weapons sold by FSB officers to Chechen rebels.

	In 1995, Trepashkin got involved in the Bank Soldi affair, described by Scott Anderson in a 2009 GQ article. Trepashkin was working on an FSB sting operation against a bank extortion ring linked to Salman Raduyev, a Chechen rebel who was then fighting against Russia in the First Chechen War. The sting resulted in a raid on a Bank Soldi branch in Moscow in Dec 1995. Trepashkin claims that the raid uncovered bugging devices used by the extortionists, whose serial numbers linked their origin to the FSB or Ministry of Defense. Furthermore, a van outside the bank was monitoring the bugging devices. In the van was Vladimir Romanovich, an FSB agent who Trepashkin claims was working for the criminals. However, most of those arrested in the sting were released. Nikolai Patrushev took Trepashkin off the case, and began an investigation of Trepashkin instead.

	...Mikhail Trepashkin was invited by MP Sergei Kovalev to assist in an independent inquiry of the Russian apartment bombings. Two sisters whose mother was killed in one of the houses hired Trepashkin to represent them in the trial of two Russian Muslims accused of transporting explosives for the bombings.

	While preparing for the trial Trepashkin claims he uncovered a trail of a suspect whose description had disappeared from the files. He claimed that the man turned out to be an FSB member named Vladimir Romanovich, the same man he claimed had been working for criminals in the Moscow Bank Soldi raid of 1995. Trepashkin said that a witness identified only the first of the 2 composite images distributed by the official investigation. This implied that the official investigation doctored the composite image to hide the perpetrators from the FSB. But Trepashkin never managed to air his findings in court. On October 22, 2003, just a week before the hearings, Trepashkin was arrested for illegal arms possession. He was convicted by a closed military court to four years for illegal arms possession, for revealing state secrets and for abuse of the office.


http://www.nybooks.com/articles/2012/11/22/finally-we-know-about-moscow-bombings/
	The entire apartment building was evacuated. Local authorities found the car used by the three who had planted the explosives, a white Zhiguli, in a nearby parking lot. To their astonishment the license plates were traced to the FSB. And when they apprehended two of the suspects, it turned out that they were FSB employees, who were soon released on orders from Moscow.

	After a day and a half of silence, Patrushev announced on television that the apparent bomb had been part of a “training exercise” and that the sacks contained only sugar. The local Ryazan FSB and regular police, who had been combing the city for more explosives, expressed outrage. In the words of one police official: “Our preliminary tests showed the presence of explosives…. As far as we were concerned, the danger was real.”


&nbsp;


https://www.files.ethz.ch/isn/94470/07_May_22.pdf
	...The rest of Litvinenko’s accusations against Vladimir Putin and the FSB were equally unsubstantiated. He blamed the Russian president for ordering the killing of a courageous human rights crusader Anna Politkovskaya


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anna_Politkovskaya
	Criticism of Vladimir Putin and FSB

	After Politkovskaya became widely known in the West, she was commissioned to write Putin's Russia (later subtitled Life in a Failing Democracy), a broader account of her views and experiences after former KGB lieutenant colonel Vladimir Putin became Boris Yeltsin's Prime Minister, and then succeeded him as President of Russia. This included Putin's pursuit of the Second Chechen War. In the book, she accused the Russian Federal Security Service (FSB) of stifling all civil liberties in order to establish a Soviet-style dictatorship

	...Politkovskaya was found dead in the lift, in her block of flats in central Moscow on 7 October 2006. She had been shot twice in the chest, once in the shoulder, and once in the head at point-blank range. Many sources which reported on her death note she was killed on Vladimir Putin's birthday.


&nbsp;


https://www.files.ethz.ch/isn/94470/07_May_22.pdf
	...This, and the accusation that the FSB was behind the seizure of the school in Beslan, were accepted without challenge by our media.

	His anti-Putin campaigns went beyond Russian internal issues. In Spring 2006, Gerard Batten, a London UK Independence Party (UKIP) MEP accused Romano Prodi, the former EU Commission president, of working for the KGB.


https://books.google.com/books?id=g3LtFS3rl9MC&pg=PA251
	What names were leaked to the press include several prominent left-wing politicians: former Prime Ministers Romano Prodi and Massimo d'Alema, among others. In many instances in other countries the information contained in the archive confirmed and completed other data that was already available. The Italian case becamse sensitive due to the large number of names that involved politicians who are still active.


http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/world/europe/472424.stm
	Tuesday, October 12, 1999

	...Mr Mitrokhin, a former KGB archivist, said that Italy had more KGB spies than any other European country except France.

	Italian prosecutors are now studying the information.

	The UK acquired the documents when Mr Mitrokhin defected from the former Soviet Union in 1992.

	The UK passed them on to Italy in 1996, but the Italian Prime Minister at the time, current European Commission President Romano Prodi, insists that he was never informed.

	A conviction for spying carries a possible 15-year prison term.


&nbsp;


https://www.files.ethz.ch/isn/94470/07_May_22.pdf
	Litvinenko had also blamed the Russian special services for shootings in the Armenian parliament in 1999, concluding that, as a result , “Russia's political leadership managed to prevent the signing of a peace agreement resolving the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict”. Again, he provided no evidence to back up his accusation. 


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Armenian_parliament_shooting#Russia
	In late April 2005, in an interview to an Azerbaijani newspaper Realniy Azerbaijan, the former Russian secret service agent Alexander Litvinenko accused the Main Intelligence Directorate (GRU) of the General Staff of the Armed Forces of the Russian Federation of having organised the Armenian parliament shooting, ostensibly to derail the peace process which would have resolved the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict


https://www.rferl.org/a/Ten_Years_Later_Deadly_Shooting_In_Armenian_Parliament_Still_Echoes/1862158.html
	...The shooting also derailed the process of settling the conflict with neighboring Azerbaijan over the Nagorno-Karabakh enclave.


http://www.huffingtonpost.com/samuel-ramani/why-vladimir-putin-wants-_b_9741618.html
	Why Vladimir Putin Wants Destabilization, Not Peace in Nagorno-Karabakh

	...Russia is Arming Both Azerbaijan and Armenia Despite Escalating Regional Tensions 


&nbsp;


https://www.files.ethz.ch/isn/94470/07_May_22.pdf
	Despite being described as a model spy, Litvinenko’s knowledge of intelligence matters was practically zero.


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alexander_Litvinenko#Career_in_Russian_security_services
	In 1991, Litvinenko was promoted to the Central Staff of the Federal Counterintelligence Service, specialising in counter-terrorist activities and infiltration of organised crime. He was awarded the title of "MUR veteran" for operations conducted with the Moscow criminal investigation department, the MUR. Litvinenko also saw active military service in many of the so-called "hot spots" of the former USSR and Russia. During the First Chechen War Litvinenko planted several FSB agents in Chechnya.


https://www.files.ethz.ch/isn/94470/07_May_22.pdf
	That does not mean he did not know any secrets, as he claimed in on page 185 of his book “LPG – Criminal Group of Lubyanka”, only to contradict himself ten pages later by writing about such a secret – the FSB laboratory on Krasnobogatyrskaya street which allegedly specialises in poisoning unruly Russians.


https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/19/alexander-litvinenko-the-man-who-solved-his-own-murder
	Alexander Litvinenko: the man who solved his own murder 

	...The men from Moscow were carrying what Kovtun confessed to a friend was “a very expensive poison”. About its properties he knew little. The poison was polonium-210, a rare radioactive isotope, tiny, invisible, undetectable. Ingested, it was fatal. The polonium had originated at a nuclear reactor in the Urals and a production line in the Russian town of Sarov. A secret FSB laboratory, the agency’s “research institute”, then converted it into a dinkily portable weapon.


https://www.files.ethz.ch/isn/94470/07_May_22.pdf
	His ten-year career in counterintelligence and security organs gave him a wealth of knowledge about security work in the MVD internal troops units and the crime-fighting organs: knowledge, which like most other things, sells better in the US than in Europe. This is probably why Litvinenko asked first for asylum in the USA. The Americans refused, perhaps on the assumption that his knowledge was of little use and that he could cause problems. There have not been many Russian/Soviet security defectors refused hospitality in the USA.


http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/home-news/the-mitrokhin-archive-kgb-defectors-copied-files-reveal-soviet-dismay-at-constantly-drunk-burgess-9588032.html
	In 1972, the KGB decided to rehouse its vast archive and Mitrokhin was, for 12 years, the officer responsible for transferring the documents from the Lubyanka to their new location. As he catalogued them, he meticulously copied them out by hand into little green-lined school exercise books.

	He retired in 1984, aged 62, wanting this vast treasure trove preserved, but not knowing how he could smuggle it out of the USSR. When the Soviet Union fell apart in 1991 the Baltic states broke free of Russian control, but the usual tight border controls were not yet in place.

	Mitrokhin travelled to one of the Baltic capitals – probably Riga – carrying a bag that contained documents hidden under dirty underwear. He deliberately looked shabby to avoid attracting the curiosity of border guards. Having failed to get anyone to listen to him at the US embassy, he visited the British embassy where member of staff offered him a cup of tea and took the documents to be examined by experts. British intelligence quickly discovered they had landed what the FBI later described as “the most complete and extensive intelligence ever received from any source”.



&nbsp;


http://www.npr.org/templates/story/story.php?storyId=5545876
	Timeline: Shamil Basayev and Terrorism

	Chechen separatist leader Shamil Besayev, killed today by Russian forces, was wanted in connection with numerous terrorist attacks throughout Russia and Chechnya in the last 15 years.

	Nov. 9, 1991: Basayev and two compatriots hijack a Russian passenger jet, diverting it to Ankara, Turkey. After giving a press conference to alert the world to the cause of the Chechen separatists and securing safe passage for himself and the other hijackers, Basayev releases the hostages.

	June 14, 1995: Basayev leads Chechen fighters in an attack on a hospital in Budyonnovsk, about 90 miles north of the Chechen border. Some 1,000 people are held hostage and about 100 people are killed; dozens more die when Russian troops unsuccessfully storm the hospital on June 17.

	Oct. 23, 2003: Chechen militants take 800 people hostage at a Moscow theater. Two days later, Russian special forces storm the building. 129 hostages and 41 Chechen fighters are killed, mostly from effects of the narcotic gas Russian forces use to subdue the attackers.

	May 9, 2004: A bomb rips through a stadium in the Chechen capital, Grozny, during a Victory Day ceremony, killing President Akhmad Kadyrov, the Kremlin's point man for efforts to control separatist violence in the region. As many as 24 people are killed.

	Aug. 24, 2004: Two airliners crash nearly simultaneously after taking off from the same Moscow airport, killing 90 people.

	Sept. 1, 2004: About 30 gunmen seize a school in the southern town of Beslan. 331 civilians (including over 180 children) die in explosions and gunfire that ended the standoff two days later.

	Oct. 13, 2005: Gunmen launch a series of attacks on police in Nalchik, capital of the tense Kabardino-Balkariya republic, near Chechnya. Basayev claims credit for planning the attack, in which 139 people were killed, including 94 militants.


------


https://www.reddit.com/r/undelete/comments/6ygj5k/comment_on_putin_making_russias_heroin_epidemic/


------


http://articles.latimes.com/1991-12-23/news/mn-710_1_chernobyl-disaster
	KIEV, Ukraine — A Ukrainian parliamentary commission, concluding a sweeping probe of the Chernobyl disaster, has accused Communist leaders at the time, including Soviet President Mikhail S. Gorbachev, of a massive criminal cover-up that led to thousands of deaths.

	Faced with the worst accident in the history of nuclear power, Soviet authorities in April, 1986, reacted with "a total lie, falsehoods, cover-up and concealment," the commission chairman, Volodymyr Yavorivsky, said. He called their conduct "a crime of the Communist system."

	The panel's blistering report, submitted to Ukraine's Supreme Rada (legislature) this month, is packed with horrific details of high-level callousness and cynicism. In Pripyat, Chernobyl's bedroom city of 49,000, the party chief ordered weddings to go ahead on the day of the accident, despite a shower of radioactivity, to persuade people that nothing was amiss.

	Most damningly, the commission, after gaining access to documents that had been kept secret by the now-dissolved Ukrainian Communist Party, concluded that "everyone in the upper echelons of power knew everything" as early as 1 p.m. on April 26, 1986, or less than 12 hours after an explosion and fire wrecked Chernobyl's No. 4 reactor.



------


https://ia601509.us.archive.org/32/items/Lysenkoism.md/Lysenkoism.md.html


http://www.encyclopedia.com/science/encyclopedias-almanacs-transcripts-and-maps/disastrous-effects-lysenkoism-soviet-agriculture
	Despite the fact that Lamarck's theory of evolution by acquired characteristics had been widely discarded as a scientific hypothesis, a remarkable set of circumstances allowed Lysenko the opportunity to sweep aside more than 100 years of scientific investigation to advocate a "politically correct" way to enhance agricultural production. When Lysenko promised greater crop yields, a Soviet Central Committee—desperate after the famine in the early 1930s—listened with an attentive ear.

	Lysenko constructed an elaborate hypothesis that came to be known as the theory of phasic development. One of Lysenko's more damaging ideas was to "toughen" seeds by treating them with heat and high humidity in an attempt to increase their ability to germinate under harsh conditions. The desire to plant winter instead of spring forms of wheat was brought about by the need to expand Russian wheat production into areas that were climatically colder than traditional growing areas. In particular, the Nazi invasion during the Second World War made critical the planting of previously fallow and colder eastern regions. For centuries, winter wheat was the principal Russian crop. Deprived of its Ukrainian breadbasket, the Soviet Union struggled to survive following Hitler's onslaught. Faced with famine—and subsequently a massive movement of farming away from the onslaught of an advancing Nazi army—Soviet agricultural planners and farmers became unconcerned with the high politics of agricultural science or long-term scientific studies.

	Lysenko ruled virtually supreme in Soviet science, and his influence extended beyond agriculture to all areas of science. In 1940, Stalin appointed Lysenko Director of the Soviet Academy of Science's Institute of Genetics. In 1948 the Praesidium of the USSR Academy of Science passed a resolution virtually outlawing any biological work that was not based on Lysenko's ideas.

	...Enamored with the political correctness and with the "scientific merit" of Lysenko's ideas, Stalin took matters one step further by personally attacking modern genetics as counter-revolutionary or bourgeois science


https://bepl.ent.sirsi.net/client/en_US/default/search/detailnonmodal/ent:$002f$002fSD_ILS$002f0$002fSD_ILS:1132847/ada
	It is now known that the Soviet program for germ warfare began in the 1920s and 1930s and grew steadily into one of the earliest and largest of the modern era, developing arms to infect people with anthrax, typhus, and other diseases. At that time, the United States had no germ weapons. Stalin's totalitarian rule poured vast resources into the endeavor, though in time his purges killed or imprisoned many leading microbiologists. The turning point for Moscow was the Second World War. The capture of a Japanese germ unit, the study of its techniques, and the resolve to strengthen the Soviet military after the wartime slaughter of millions of Russians helped renew interest in germ weapons. In 1946 at Sverdlovsk, military engineers set up a factory that specialized in anthrax. In 1947 outside Zagorsk, the Soviet military built a complex for making viral weapons, including smallpox. By 1956, when the U-2 planes started flying over the Soviet Union, Moscow had built many secret bases across the land for developing and producing germ weapons.


http://inss.ndu.edu/Portals/68/Documents/occasional/cswmd/CSWMD_OccasionalPaper-11.pdf?ver=2016-07-18-144946-743
	According to Fishman’s 1928 progress report, Ginsburg’s group attempted to enhance properties of B. anthracis spores, which already in their natural state are well suited for purposes of BW, being both virulent and hardy, but which conceivably could be made even deadlier by using classical microbiology techniques of mutation, selection, and propagation. 


http://www.encyclopedia.com/science/encyclopedias-almanacs-transcripts-and-maps/disastrous-effects-lysenkoism-soviet-agriculture
	During the 1930s and 1940s, scientists were routinely executed, imprisoned, or exiled. Soviet science was largely carried forward in specially built labor camps, where scientists denounced as "saboteurs" continued their work in total isolation from the outside world.

	Under Stalin and Lysenko, scientific truth became both incompatible and inappropriate to political truth. Information on genetics was eliminated from Soviet biology textbooks, and Lysenko attempted to reduce his conflict with classical geneticists to political contradictions. Lysenko stated that there existed two class-based biologies: "bourgeois" vs. "socialist, dialectical materialist." The entire agricultural research infrastructure of the Soviet Union—a country with millions whose lives teetered on starvation—was devoted to a disproved scientific hypothesis, and inventive methods were used to falsely "prove" that there was no famine and that crop yields were actually on the rise.

	...Based on his misunderstanding of genetics, Lysenko developed methods that falsely predicted greater crop yields through a hardening of seeds and a new system of crop rotation. Lysenko's system of crop rotation eventually led to soil depletion that required years of replenishment with mineral fertilizers.

	...Beyond a mere rejection of nearly a century of advancements in genetics, Lysenkoism—at a minimum—made worse the famine and deprivations facing Soviet citizens.



------




------


https://ia601502.us.archive.org/22/items/RussianRootsOfNazism.md/Russian-roots-of-Nazism.md.html


http://bookfi.net/dl/548070/5d8658
    ...Kommissarov, a prominent member of the Saint Petersburg Okhrana, provided the Union with additional support. ...After the outbreak of socialist revolution in the Russian Empire in 1905, he established a clandestine printing press in the basement of Okhrana headquarters. He used this press to print anti-Semitic leaflets calling for pogroms.

    ...Kommissarov proved a most colorful adventurer who underwent many permutations in his career of intrigue and deceit. He ultimately helped to establish Aufbau, the Munich-based völkisch German/White émigré organization that greatly influenced the National Socialist movement, in 1920 as a double agent before he openly joined the Soviet cause.


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Aufbau_Vereinigung
    The Aufbau Vereinigung (Reconstruction Organisation) was a Munich-based counterrevolutionary conspiratorial group formed in the aftermath of the German occupation of the Ukraine in 1918 and of the Latvian Intervention of 1919. It brought together White Russian émigrés and early German National Socialists who aimed to overthrow the governments of Germany and the Soviet Union, replacing them with authoritarian régimes of the far right.

    ...According to Michael Kellogg, the Aufbau Vereinigung was a vital influence on the development of Nazi ideology in the years before the Beer Hall Putsch of 1923 as well as financing NSDAP with, for example, funds from Henry Ford. It gave Hitler the idea of a vast Jewish conspiracy, involving a close alliance between international finance and Bolshevism and threatening disaster for mankind. Recent research on Hitler’s early years in Vienna (1905-1913) appears to have shown that his antisemitism was at that time far less developed than it became under the new influences.

    ...The long-term influence of Aufbau has been traced in the implementation of the final solution and in Hitler’s disastrous decision to divert troops away from Moscow towards the Ukraine in 1941.


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Richard_Sorge
    Richard Sorge (October 4, 1895 – November 7, 1944) was a Soviet military intelligence officer, active before and during World War II, working as an undercover German journalist in both Nazi Germany and the Empire of Japan.

    ...Sorge supplied Soviet intelligence with information about the Anti-Comintern Pact and the German-Japanese Pact. In 1941, through his Embassy contacts, he learned of Operation Barbarossa, the imminent Axis invasion of the USSR, and even the approximate date. Moscow received the report, but ultimately Joseph Stalin and other top leaders ignored Sorge’s warnings, as well as those of other sources.


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lucy_spy_ring
    Roessler's first major contribution to Soviet intelligence came in May 1941 when he was able to deliver details of Operation Barbarossa, Germany's impending invasion of the Soviet Union. Following the invasion, in June 1941, Lucy was regarded as a VYRDO source, i.e. of the highest importance, and to be transmitted immediately. Over the next two years "Lucy" was able to supply the Soviets with high grade military intelligence. During the autumn of 1942, "Lucy" provided the Soviets with detailed information about Case Blue, the German operations against Stalingrad and the Caucasus; during this period decisions taken in Berlin were arriving in Moscow on average within a ten-hour period; on one occasion in just six hours, not much longer than it took to reach German front line units. 


http://www.nytimes.com/1981/06/21/magazine/hitler-s-russian-blunder.html
    ...To this day, no one knows why Stalin ignored the warnings. Those Soviet historians who address this delicate subject suggest that he was playing for time in which to build up Russia’s armed forces. A similar explanation has been offered for the British and French willingness to appease Hitler at Munich.

    If the Russian explanation is true, then Stalin and his Government accomplished very little in the time bought by appeasement. The weapons and equipment of the Russian army, air force and navy were lamentable when the war began and continued to be so for another two years.


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/2006_Soviet_war_documents_declassification
	The documents coming from the Central Archive of the Russian Ministry of Defence were written mostly by seven Soviet military commanders (Pyotr Sobennikov, Pavel Abramidze, Mikhail Zashibalov, Nikolai Ivanov, Ivan Bagramian, Boris Fomin and Kuzma Derevyanko) at the request of the fact-finding panel of the Military History Department of the General Staff of the Soviet Army. Headed by Colonel General Alexander Pokrovsky, the panel was formed in 1952 and put five questions about the preparedness of the Baltic, Kiev and Belorussian military districts. The questions concerned the receipt of the border defence plan by the Soviet troops, the deployment of covering forces on the state border, the receipt of the order on combat readiness, the reason why the majority of Soviet artillery units were in training camps and the preparedness of the unit staffs for troops management. The questions were addressed to persons who on the eve of Operation Barbarossa held high-ranking military positions, down to division and corps commanders.

	...The documents generally indicate that the Soviet high command underestimated the German threat and ignored the information about the impending invasion. Derevyanko, in particular, wrote that two or three months before the invasion the command and staff of the Baltic Military District had reliable information about Germany's strengthening and preparation for the war. Noting that he repeatedly notified the command of the German buildup in the border regions, Derevyanko wrote that his impression was "that the military district command underestimated the impending threat and distrusted a lot of intelligence data". According to Derevyanko, in early June 1941 the district's staff started to receive information about the timing of German invasion. Three to four days before the invasion the informations contained not only the precise date, but also the estimated time of the invasion.


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Operation_Barbarossa
	The initial momentum of the German ground and air attack completely destroyed the Soviet organizational command and control within the first few hours, paralyzing every level of command from the infantry platoon to the Soviet High Command in Moscow. Moscow not only failed to grasp the magnitude of the catastrophe that confronted the Soviet forces in the border area, but Stalin's first reaction was also disbelief. At around 07:15, Stalin issued NKO Directive No. 2, which announced the invasion to the Soviet Armed Forces, and called on them to attack Axis forces wherever they had violated the borders and launch air strikes into the border regions of German territory. At around 09:15, Stalin issued NKO Directive No. 3, signed by Marshal Semyon Timoshenko, which now called for a general counteroffensive on the entire front "without any regards for borders" that both men hoped would sweep the enemy from Soviet territory. Stalin's order, which Timoshenko authorized, was not based on a realistic appraisal of the military situation at hand, but commanders passed it along for fear of retribution if they failed to obey; several days passed before the Soviet leadership became aware of the enormity of the opening defeat.


https://www.theatlantic.com/photo/2011/07/world-war-ii-operation-barbarossa/100112/
	...the Soviets were unprepared for the sudden blitzkreig attacks across a border that spanned nearly 2,900 km (1,800 mi), and they suffered horrible losses. Within a single week, German forces advanced 200 miles into Soviet territory, destroyed nearly 4,000 aircraft, and killed, captured, or wounded some 600,000 Red Army troops.


https://www.cbsnews.com/news/recalling-operation-barbarossa/
	...The Soviets had lost at least 802,000 killed, 3 million wounded, and another 3.3 million captured. These 7 million losses, in just the first months of a war that would last four years, were double the number of troops German intelligence had reported the Soviets possessed at the start of the war. They also represented over seven times America's killed and wounded during all of World War II. 

	...By late fall, the Soviet Union seemed to be on its last legs, and those were wobbly. At one point early in the invasion, Stalin, "the man of steel," had a nervous breakdown. When a group of party officials came seeking his guidance, he cowered, believing that they had come to execute him for his mishandling of the war. But the Germans and the rest of the world had underestimated Soviet recuperative powers.


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Soviet_Union_in_World_War_II#Soviet_push_to_Germany
	...Kursk also marked the beginning of a period where Stalin became more willing to listen to the advice of his generals.

	By the end of 1943, the Soviets occupied half of the territory taken by the Germans from 1941–42. Soviet military industrial output also had increased substantially from late 1941 to early 1943 after Stalin had moved factories well to the East of the front, safe from German invasion and air attack. The strategy paid off, as such industrial increases were able to occur even while the Germans in late 1942 occupied more than half of European Russia, including 40 percent (80 million) of its population, and approximately 2,500,000 square kilometres (970,000 sq mi) of Soviet territory. The Soviets had also prepared for war for more than a decade, including preparing 14 million civilians with some military training. Accordingly, while almost all of the original 5 million men of the Soviet army had been wiped out by the end of 1941, the Soviet military had swelled to 8 million members by the end of that year. Despite substantial losses in 1942 far in excess of German losses, Red Army size grew even further, to 11 million. While there is substantial debate whether Stalin helped or hindered these industrial and manpower efforts, Stalin left most economic wartime management decisions in the hands of his economic experts.


https://www.theatlantic.com/photo/2011/10/world-war-ii-the-fall-of-nazi-germany/100166/
	The Red Army had meanwhile entered Austria, and both fronts quickly approached Berlin. Strategic bombing campaigns by Allied aircraft were pounding German territory, sometimes destroying entire cities in a night. In the first several months of 1945, Germany put up a fierce defense, but rapidly lost territory, ran out of supplies, and exhausted its options. In April, Allied forces pushed through the German defensive line in Italy. East met West on the River Elbe on April 25, 1945, when Soviet and American troops met near Torgau, Germany. Then came the end of the Third Reich, as the Soviets took Berlin, Adolf Hitler committed suicide on April 30, and Germany surrendered unconditionally on all fronts on May 8. Hitler's planned "Thousand-Year Reich" lasted only 12 incredibly destructive years.