https://www.nbcnews.com/politics/white-house/halfway-through-trump-coming-empty-travel-ban-n792276
	Politics
	Aug 14 2017, 6:30 pm ET
	Halfway Through, Trump Coming Up Empty on Travel Ban



------


does 9th circuit thing have anything to do with cases involving Trump?

http://www.civilbeat.org/2017/08/republicans-pushing-to-slice-up-the-9th-circuit-court/
	Republicans Pushing To Slice Up The 9th Circuit Court

	...He has proposed legislation, S 276, co-sponsored by Sen. John McCain, also of Arizona, and Sen. Dean Heller, a Republican from Nevada, that would restructure the appellate court and reduce its size.

	...Judges and lawyers from throughout Hawaii are strongly opposing the proposal, saying it would hurt judicial administration in the state.

	Hawaii Bar Association President Nadine Ando wrote that splitting up the 9th Circuit would be expensive and unnecessary, “as there is no compelling empirical evidence of adjudicative or administrative dysfunction in the existing structure.”

	“These proposed measures are not in the public interest,” Ando wrote on Aug. 1.

	...“The 9th Circuit cannot handle the number of states currently entrapped within its jurisdiction, causing access to justice to be delayed,” Biggs said in a press release in January.

	President Donald Trump has repeatedly said he would like to see the 9th Circuit split up. In April, for example, in an interview with the Washington Examiner, he said he was “absolutely” committed to looking into breaking up the court.

	It was the 9th Circuit that repeatedly rejected efforts by the Trump administration to reinstate his executive order setting restrictions on visas from seven majority-Muslim countries.


http://www.civilbeat.org/2017/06/civil-beat-poll-tulsi-gabbards-surprising-plunge-in-hawaii/
	Some of that criticism came in early January when she met with President-elect Trump at his home in New York City before the inauguration, stirring rumors that she wanted to join his administration, which she denied. Then she raised eyebrows by traveling surreptitiously to Syria to meet with despotic Syrian strongman Bashar al-Assad, in what she described as an attempted peace parley.

	Several voters said they admired Gabbard, but were surprised and disturbed by some of her recent actions, which some called opportunistic and overly ambitious.


http://www.civilbeat.org/2017/04/vice-president-pence-cuts-short-his-visit-to-hawaii/



http://www.civilbeat.org/2017/04/gabbard-focuses-on-north-korea-amid-questions-about-syria/
	Another questioner wanted to know when it would be possible to impeach President Trump, a suggestion that attracted cheers from many parts of the room.

	Gabbard said it would not be a good idea to remove Trump from office because the ascension of Vice President Mike Pence would make for an “even worse situation.” Pence, a conservative Christian from Indiana, is an avid anti-abortion advocate and a former member of the congressional tea party caucus.

	“We’ve got to be realistic about the table that’s been set before us,” Gabbard said.


author seems to go easy on Gabbard

http://www.civilbeat.org/2017/02/how-trump-is-working-to-play-nice-with-japan/

slightly pro-Trump, pro-Abe article?


------

https://www.law360.com/appellate/articles/957116
	The groups allege that the various legislative proposals, which have been spearheaded by Republican lawmakers, are driven by ideological and political interests looking to carve out a new court that could theoretically be friendlier to those interests than the current Ninth Circuit. The groups pointed to recent attacks on the appeals court by President Donald Trump after the court struck down his travel ban and after a lower court blocked the president from withholding federal funds to sanctuary cities.

	“In fact, President Trump has led the recent charge to split the Ninth Circuit because he perceives it to be hostile to his unconstitutional agenda,” the letter said. “Such results-driven considerations should not dictate the structure of the judiciary. Allowing this ideological campaign to overhaul the judicial branch threatens the integrity and independence of the judicial system.”

------

https://twitter.com/fordm/status/900448151387205632

Dershowitz: trying the first version of the travel ban would be a bad idea...


------

http://www.latimes.com/local/california/la-me-9th-circuit-20170427-htmlstory.html
	President Trump, angry about a judge’s decision to temporarily block enforcement of his order against “sanctuary” cities, has called for breaking up the U.S. 9th Circuit Court of Appeals.

	Never mind that the sanctuary city ruling came from a trial judge on the district court bench in San Francisco — not the 9th Circuit appellate court.

	“It’s the 9th Circuit going bananas,” White House Chief of Staff Reince Priebus told reporters after the judge blocked Trump’s order, which threatened to cut federal funds to jurisdictions that limit cooperation with immigration agents.

	Trump tweeted: “First the Ninth Circuit rules against the ban & now it hits again on sanctuary cities-both ridiculous rulings. See you in the Supreme Court!”

	The sanctuary ruling will not even get to the 9th Circuit until Trump appeals the lower court’s decision.

	...The parade for change began with a senator from Washington state whose state kept losing fishing cases in the 9th Circuit. Contentious rulings by the court over the years increased the fomentation. The 9th Circuit, for example, was the source of a ruling that the mention of God in the Pledge of Allegiance violated the Constitution. The Supreme Court overturned the decision.


wow that is nuts...

	...A new circuit also could mean more judicial appointments for the sitting president — in this case, Trump.


but this is bad

	...Just how liberal is the 9th Circuit?

	Not as liberal as it used to be. Judges appointed by President Carter have traditionally been the most liberal, and they are retiring or taking reduced workloads. President Clinton’s appointees are considered much more conservative than Carter’s. The court will continue to experience turnover, which will change the circuit’s bent.


9th circuit not as bad as it used to be (carter)


------

http://www.cnn.com/2017/04/26/politics/9th-circuit-what-to-know/index.html
	Should the 9th Circuit be split up?

	Arizona GOP Sen. Jeff Flake and others over time have introduced legislation to split up the 9th Circuit

	"A fair and functioning judiciary is one of the pillars of our democracy, but the oversized and overburdened 9th Circuit has Arizonans waiting too long for justice," said Flake, a member of the Senate Judiciary Committee, last February. "Establishing a new circuit with stronger local, regional, and cultural ties will ease the burden across the West and ensure that the people of Arizona finally get the swift access to the courts they deserve."


https://www.brookings.edu/blog/fixgov/2017/05/16/trump-wants-to-break-up-the-ninth-circuit-how-would-that-help-him/
	Even with these caveats, the bills on the table would do little to serve Trump’s decision-oriented goals. The restructured Ninth circuit appellate court’s 19 judgeships would still be the largest of the U.S. courts of appeals. The 60% plus majority Democratic appointees will have on the current court once Trump fills four vacancies would be reduced only slightly on a restructured court. Trump might have some opportunity for more appointments

that's bad

------

http://www.readingeagle.com/ap/article/can-trump-break-up-the-9th-circuit
	Kozinski, a libertarian-leaning Republican appointed by President Ronald Reagan, was one of three 9th Circuit judges who testified last month in Congress against breaking up the circuit.

	They argued that splitting the 9th into two circuits would cost more money, create more confusion in the law and make the circuits’ judges more insular.

interesting

	University of Pennsylvania law professor Jonah Gelbach said the chances of winning congressional approval for a split remain “pretty slight” because it would make “absolutely no sense” legally, fiscally or even politically.

	“Breaking up the circuit doesn’t mean the judges get fired,” Gelbach said. “This isn’t judicial ‘Apprentice.’”


right, but how does it lead to more apointments? does it?

	...Though Trump appears to believe he will lose in the 9th Circuit, legal scholars say the court is less liberal than its reputation.

	That reputation is due in large part to judges appointed by President Jimmy Carter. An expansion of the circuit during Carter’s presidency allowed him to fill 10 new judgeships in addition to 9th Circuit vacancies.


so if the split involves expanding courts also, could be how Trump gets to appoint more judges. But would it?

	...More retirements and new appointments will continue to alter the circuit, and Trump will participate in that change.

	With four vacancies on the 9th Circuit, Trump has an immediate opportunity to help mold the court that his chief of staff depicted as “going bananas.”


maybe the split would prompt more to retire?