https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/for-secretive-surveillance-court-rare-scrutiny-in-wake-of-nsa-leaks/2013/06/22/df9eaae6-d9fa-11e2-a016-92547bf094cc_story.html
	By Peter Wallsten, Carol D. Leonnig and Alice Crites

	...The public is getting a peek into the little-known workings of a powerful and mostly invisible government entity. And it is seeing a court whose secret rulings have in effect created a body of law separate from the one on the books — one that gives U.S. spy agencies the authority to collect bulk information about Americans’ medical care, firearms purchases, credit card usage and other interactions with business and commerce, according to Sen. Ron Wyden (D-Ore.).

	“The government can get virtually anything,” said Wyden, who as a member of the Senate Intelligence Committee is allowed to read many of the court’s classified rulings. “Health, guns, credit cards — my reading is not what has been done, it’s what can be done.”



but would need warrant to look at it:

https://www.propublica.org/article/nsa-data-collection-faq



https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/lawmakers-say-administrations-lack-of-candor-on-surveillance-weakens-oversight/2013/07/10/8275d8c8-e97a-11e2-aa9f-c03a72e2d342_story.html
	Lawmakers say administration’s lack of candor on surveillance weakens oversight

	By Peter Wallsten

	...The administration’s claims are being reexamined in light of disclosures by National Security Agency contractor Edward Snowden, reported by The Washington Post and Britain’s Guardian newspaper, of broad government surveillance of Americans’ Internet and phone use authorized under secret interpretations of law.


	...Defenders of the surveillance programs in Congress, including Senate Intelligence Committee Chairman Dianne Feinstein (D-Calif.) and Rep. Mike Rogers (R-Mich.), chairman of the House intelligence panel, have said the programs were fully explained. Senate Majority Leader Harry M. Reid (D-Nev.) pointed to “many, many meetings” where surveillance was discussed and said members had “every opportunity to be aware of these programs.”

	But some lawmakers say they feel that many of the administration’s public statements — often couched in terms that offered assurances of the government’s respect for civil liberties and privacy — seemed designed to mislead Americans and avoid congressional scrutiny.



https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/nsa-surveillance-program-has-had-compliance-problems-official-says/2013/07/26/f64c9820-f63d-11e2-a2f1-a7acf9bd5d3a_story.html
	NSA surveillance program has had compliance problems, official says

	By Peter Wallsten

	...Wyden has warned in the past that the court’s secret interpretations of the Patriot Act gave the government the authority to collect other forms of bulk data, including health information and credit card records.

	In response to Clapper’s denial that additional bulk data was being collected, Wyden said, as he has before, that the government’s authority is “limitless.”

	Clapper pushed back against previous assertions by Wyden that a secret reinterpretation of law allowed the bulk collection. He described underlying legal opinions as “properly classified.”

	Wyden said: “That just takes your breath away.”



https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/2013/08/10/bee87394-004d-11e3-9a3e-916de805f65d_story.html?utm_term=.38e4b86c80bd
	Lawmakers say obstacles limited oversight of NSA’s telephone surveillance program

	By Peter Wallsten

	The Obama administration points to checks and balances from Congress as a key rationale for supporting bulk collection of Americans’ telephone communications data, but several lawmakers responsible for overseeing the program in recent years say that they felt limited in their ability to challenge its scope and legality.

	...Unlike typical congressional hearings that feature testimony from various sides of a debate, the briefings in 2010 and 2011 on the telephone surveillance program were by definition one-sided affairs, with lawmakers hearing only from government officials steeped in the legal and national security arguments for aggressive spying.

	...The administration’s move Friday to issue a fuller defense of the surveillance program, disclosed publicly in June by former NSA contractor Edward Snowden, seemed designed to stem a growing bipartisan tide on Capitol Hill against bulk collection of Americans’ data. A measure co-sponsored by a young libertarian, Rep. Justin Amash (R-Mich.), and an old liberal, Rep. John Conyers Jr. (D-Mich.), to halt the bulk data collection was narrowly defeated in a close call that surprised administration officials.

	On Friday, Obama and his administration sought to remind the public that many of these same lawmakers moving to undercut the program had previously signed off on it.

	...His calls for change have been echoed in recent days by other defenders of the NSA program, including Senate Intelligence Committee Chairwoman Dianne Feinstein (D-Calif.), who said Friday she would launch a “major review” this fall of the bulk collection program. A similar effort is being planned by the Republican chairman of the House Intelligence Committee, Rep. Mike Rogers of Michigan. The reviews are geared toward increasing public confidence in programs that remain fully supported by the committees — and are not designed to end the bulk collection.

	...“The result,” Holt added, “is that Congress has not been able to, and in many cases has not wanted to, exert serious oversight of the intelligence community.”

	But outside committee meetings, Holt said agency officials were assertive in their efforts to “ingratiate” themselves with intelligence committee members by letting them experience some tools of the spy trade.

	One time, in between meetings with agency officials, for instance, Holt and several colleagues were invited to shoot high-caliber weapons at a CIA firing range.



https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/house-panel-withheld-document-on-nsa-surveillance-program-from-members/2013/08/16/944e728e-0672-11e3-9259-e2aafe5a5f84_story.html
	House panel withheld document on NSA surveillance program from members

	By Peter Wallsten August 16, 2013

	Ronald Weich, who was an assistant attorney general at the time, wrote that making the material available to Congress would be an “effective way to inform the legislative debate about reauthorization” of the provision of the Patriot Act that served as the legal basis for the phone surveillance. A similar document was available to all members of Congress in 2009, prior to a 2010 reauthorization vote.

	But the House Intelligence Committee opted against making the 2011 document widely available. Instead, the committee invited all 435 House members to attend classified briefings where the program was discussed — briefings that critics say were vague and uninformative.



https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/obama-making-little-headway-with-getting-congress-to-support-attack-on-syria/2013/09/05/7d51ddfe-1640-11e3-be6e-dc6ae8a5b3a8_story.htm
	Obama making little headway with getting Congress to support attack on Syria 

	By Karen Tumulty and Peter Wallsten

	...After the Cold War ended, Democrats “coalesced around the use of American power to prevent genocide and other gross violations of human rights,” William A. Galston, a senior fellow at the Brookings Institution who was an adviser to President Bill Clinton, wrote this week. “But for many of today’s Democrats, Iraq serves as the moral equivalent of Vietnam and evokes comparable doubts about the use of American power.”


https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/obama-launches-final-push-to-win-congressional-support-for-a-strike-on-syria/2013/09/08/7ab2e884-18ae-11e3-8685-5021e0c41964_story.html
	“The only thing more confusing to me [than] what their Syria strategy has been the last two years is their strategy to try to get buy-in by the representatives in Congress and the American people,” Rep. Mike Rogers (R-Mich.), chairman of the House Intelligence Committee, said on CBS’s “Face the Nation.” “It is a confusing mess up to this point, and that has been, I think, their biggest challenge on what is an incredibly important issue.”

	Rogers said the White House did “an awful job explaining to the American people what is in our national security — what is the national United States interests in any level of engagement in a place like Syria.”

	Rep. Adam Kinzinger (R-Ill.), an Iraq war veteran elected as part of the tea-party wave of 2010, complained on ABC’s “This Week” and in a Washington Post interview Friday that the White House didn’t respond to his offer of help in recent days to rally support among skeptical Republicans for the Syria resolution.