

https://www.jstor.org/stable/2538811?seq=2#page_scan_tab_contents
	...from June 1919 through the Third Reich, key elements of the German bureaucracy mounted a massive and successful campaign of disinformation that purveyed false propaganda through a wide range of channels. These included the War Guilt Section (Kriegsschuldreferat) of the Foreign Ministry, which disseminated its official stance on war guilt most notably through two agencies which it recruited to this end--the Working Committee of German Associations (Arbeitsausschsuss Duetscher Verbande) annd the Center for the Study of the Causes of the War (Zetralstell zue ERforschung der Kiregsculdfrage)--as well as a parlimentary Comittee of Enquiery (Untersuchungsausschuss). Writers were also engaged either directly or indirectly by the Foreign Ministry to propogate its views, to organize translations of foreign studies sympathetic to the German cause, and to channel the Whilhelmstrasse's official line to German schools and dimplomatic missions via newspapers and radio.


Writers "engaged either directly or indirectly by the Foreign Ministry"--what does that mean? Reminds me of Hollweg and I think others in the foreign ministry speaking as if they could plant stories in the press at will. Would be good to know which journalists they were in contact with.


	...By selectively editing documentary collections, suppressing honest scholarship, subsidizing pseudo-scholarship, underwriting mass propaganda, and overseeing the export of this propaganda especially to Britain, France, and the United States, the patriotic self-censors in Berlin exerted a powerful influence on public and elite opinion in Germany and, to a lesser extent, outside Germany.


So they would also send propaganda abroad.

	
	Their efforts polluted historical understanding both at home and abroad well into the post-1945 period. Indeed, the acrimonious debate since 1983 concerning the originality of Kurt Riezler's diaries especially during the critical July crisis is but the most outward symptom of this ongoing historical conundrum.


Is he trying to say German propagandists are still at it to this day? who does he think is paying them?

there were some oddities with Reizler's diary, like that Fritz Stern was somehow the only other person in the world with a copy and some of the things he wrote seemed off.


	The significance of the campaign of official and semi-official obfuscation and perversion of fact extends well beyond the history of Germany or the origins of the Great War. It raises basic questions concerning the role of the historian in society, scholarly integrity, decency, ad public morality. It further illustrates the universal problem of establishing the critical record of events that are sufficiently vital to the national interest to become the objects of partisan propaganda. What is the present generation, for example, to make of the collective and concerted efforts of eminent German scholars purposefully to distort their countrymen's study of history and sociology of knowledge? Does a perverse law operate whereby those events that are most important are hardest to understand because they attract the greatest attention from mythmakers and charlatans? And is a nation well-served when its intellectual establishment conspires to obstruct honest investigation into national catastrophes, upon which past, present, and future vital national interests can be reassessed? The far-reaching effects of the resulting disinformation are incalculable.


"is a nation well-served when its intellectual establishment conspires to obstruct honest investigation into national catastrophes, upon which past, present, and future vital national interests can be reassessed?" the answer is no, and maybe that was the idea...

	
	Several other, related issues require to be addressed tangentially. Nazi expansionism clearly fed upon the fertile intellectual basis laid down for it by the patriotic self-censors in the 1920s. In other words, Adolf Hitler's radical "revisionism" was already well-rooted in public and elite opinion under the Wiemar Republic.


German ww1-guilt propaganda helped give rise to Nazis.


goes on to say Jagow and Zimmermann sent out the first war-guilt propaganda


	only the Independent Socialists (USPD) demanded that Germany reveal the truth concerning the origins of the war, regardless of where the blame lay.


interesting--any back and forth going on here? would be interesting to see if the "german propagandists" and socialists were helping each other out.


	On November 21, 1918, Kurt Eisner, Minister-President of the revolutionary government in Bavaria, instructed his envoy in Berlin to press the Provisional Government of Friedrich Ebert to publish all documents pertinent to the outbreak of the war. Two days later, Eisner provided Munich newspapers with excerpts from the reports of the Bavarian plenipotentiary at Berlin in July/August 1914 to show that the war had been orchestrated by what Eisner termed "a small horde of mad Prussian military" me as well as "allied" industrialists, capitalists, politicians, and princes. 


whats up with that

later, says Bernhard W. von Bulow was cheif of "general staff" of the War Guilt Section of the Foreign Minstry. Was assigned to this post by Brockdorff-Rantzau. Matthias Erzberger also favored Bulow's appointment. Bulow was the chancellor of Germany before Hollweg and was ambassador to Italy during the war.

some were worried about "Kautsky documents" Karl Kautsky was a guy tasked by socialists in the provisional government to find docs about what German politicians did to start the war.

So right away they start a socialist vs proto-fascist fight.


	...Bulow's most immediate task in 1919 was to do the spade work for the upcoming "negotiations" with the victorious Allies in Paris. An ardent nationalist and zealous bureacrat, Bulow began to comb the recently published Soviet documents concerning the Tsar's foreign policy before July 1914 for incriminating materials that could bee used against the Allies at Paris, and next studied and published critiques of the various "colored books" put out by Belgium, Britain, France, and Rumania to show that they were incomplete and inaccurate. Yet his greatest task was to prepare the case against the Allied charge that Germany (and Austria-Hungary) was solely responsible for the Great War, and the accompanying demand for the surrender and trial of major "war criminals" (later, Article 228 of the Versaiiles treaty)--a demand that threated to reach into the very chambers of the Wilhelmstreasse.


seems like Bulow did a bad job of negotiating for Germany at Versailles.

Bulow was also chancellor for awhile and iirc involved in prolonging war and helping install Lenin

actually not sure how Bulow was involved, thought I saw his name come up, maybe worth looking into further.


	On January 7, 1919, Erzberger convened a special meeting with representatives of the Foreign Office and the erstwhile Supreme Command of the Army (O.H.L.). It was decided that Bulow would undertake research in the diplomatic records on the issue of war guilt; Major Bodo von Harbou, a former assistant to General Erich Lundendorff, was entrusted with similar work in the military records. ...Morever, the Office's head, Count Johann Heinrich von Bernstorff, the former German ambassadr to the United States, asked Jagow, who had been Foreign Secretary in 1914, to prepare the pivotal position paper on the July crisis--along with the former head of his political secion, Wilhelm von Stumm.


I wouldn't trust these guys for the job... wasn't Jagow involved in starting/prolonging the war too? would be a conflict of interest. Burlow was also in with the Foreign Ministry at the time.

	pg 12

	Bulow, who had gone to assist Brockdorff-Rantzau at Paris, was of course fully aware of the delicate nature of his task. As he returned official diplomatic records to Berlin, he instructed the later head of the Kriegschuldreferat, Hans Freytag, to lock them up in a special safe so taht "in case the entente should demand them"--as they apparently intended to reserve the right to do (later, rticle 230 of the Versailles treat)--"they can be got out of the way easily."


Bulow working for Brockdorff-Rantzau, conspiring to get documents on German gov war gult "out of the way easily
"

	And in assembling his documents, Bulow might well have been aware of Fouche's *bon mot* cited at the beginning of this article the legation secretary in an uncharacteristically candid moment informed Freytag that "any nation can be charged successfully" on the basis of its documents; "I would undertake 'to prove' conclusively from the archives of any nation that it, and it alone, is responsible for the war--or for whatever else you like." In keeping with this spirit of selection, Bulow divided the documents that he assembled into two categories, marked "defense" and "offense."


Kindof sets the tone for the "war guilt" debates to follow--I guess nationalists spent their time blaming other countries while socialists saw this and decided to blame their own governments.


	...The immediate result of these efforts was the "professor's memorandum" of May 27, 1919. Submitted to the Allies by Hans Delbruck, Max von Montgelas, Albrecht Mendelssoh-Bartholdy, and Max Weber, all members of the Heidelberg Association for a Policy of Justice, the document asserted that Germany in 1914 had conducted a "defensive war against Tsarism," "the most dreadful system of enslavement . . . ever devised before the present peace treaty." ...most likely, it was also penned by Bulow, well before the professors ever arrived at Paris. ...Weber in his heart of hearts at least knew better, and privately confessed to Delbruck that he "shuddered" at the thought of "what might be in our documents."


They come up with a heap of bullshit to present to versailles and have some professors sign-off on it.

pg 13

	The crisis situation in this respect reached a fever pitch on two occasions: May 7, 1919, when the Allies handed the Germans the text of the proposed peace accord; and June 16, 1919, when Premier Geroges Clemenceau presented Berlin with an ultimatum either to accept the offered terms or to renew the fighting. The Germans reacted on May 28 by submitting to the Allies a second *White ook, which Brockdorff-Rantzau concurrently released for publication; its core was the famous professors' memorandum previously mentioned. Of course, these German efforts at "revision," as the campaign to overturn war-guilt charges was now labeled, had virtually no effect on the Allies. The Reich had no choice but to accept the Diktak on June 28, 1919.


Brockdorff-Rantzau inolved a lot in the negotiations for Versailles? maybe worth looking into more.

The versailles terms were ridciulous--the campaign to force Germany to accept them is also suspicious, iirc Foch was involved. Basicially forced it on them and set things up to piss off Germany and give rise to the Nazis.


pg 13

	The editors for the project--initially estimated to run for four months and to three volumes--preferably would have to be "respectable" scholars not immediately attached to the Foreign Ministry. ...Thime and Lepsius were paid 2,000 Mark per month and provided with research and technical staff by the Foreign Ministry. In time, Thimme became managing editor of the mammoth project. The Wilhelmstrasse, for its part, not only directed the three editors on how to prepare the materials for publication, but also attached to them a special supervisor who was to evaluate possible public reaction to the documents selected for publication. Its War Guilt Section exercised final veto power over all volumes. The Foreign Ministry officially treated the documentary project as "secret" and "confidential" in order to camouflage its involvement therein.


sounds like they couldn't shake the Foreign Ministry being involved


pg 15 says the got Foreign Office docs in "Die Grosse Politik," but were missing docs from the General Staff, the War Ministry, the Navy Office, and "the bureaus responsible for economic preparations for the war." General Staff and War Ministry files were "almost totally destroyed" during the war.

This could be very interesting--what would files from other agencies say about Germany's war guilt? The foreign ministry docs make them look totally guilty, but other docs like the Nicky-Willy telegrams paint a more nuanced picture. Burtsev was the one to "uncover" those, and the story around them makes it sound like they weren't included in whatever this group produced.


	...Imanuel Geiss has shown with specific reference to the July 1914 crisis that the editors failed to include (perhaps destroyed) a number of utterly critical documents: the discussions on July 5 and 6 at Potsdam not only among German leaders but also with Austro-Hungarian representatives;


possibly whatever in there would have made them look ever worse...


	the detailed analysis of the Viennese ultimatum to Serbia, missing in Die Gross Politik but handed to the Baden plenipotentiary on July 2; virtually any and all talks held by the Chancellor of the State Secretary and Under Secretary of the Foreign Office with representatives of foreign powers in July 1914;


ditto for these--maybe would show collusion? who knows


	any and all contacts between Wilhelm II and his political as well as military leaders after the monarch's return from his northern cruise on July 27;


presumably Wilhelm was pissed, at least he was angry (I think during the cruise) according the Taylor


	and, last but not least, any and all notes pertaining to important telephone calls, telegraphs, or other verbal communications.


dunno what would be in these. I guess the call from Jagow about British mediation would be interesting.

pg 17 -- interesting that Thimme was denied a doctorate for Die Grosse Politik but Alfred von Wegerer was.

pg 18

	...The widely acclaimed story that the Foreign Ministry marked several of its files "not to be shown to William Langer" may be apocryphal, but the case of Geroge Hallgarten is documented. In 1931, Hallgarten was denied access to the foreign relations records as his work might "compromise" Germany's "present or future interests in China." Refusing to take no for an answer, Hallgarten reapplied for permission to use official materials, and was finally let in. By chance, he was handed the files on German policy with regard to Delago Bay--files that Thimme had assured scholars did not exist. Moreover, upon returning after the Second Wolrd War to reexamine the dossiers on China that he had been given in the early 1930s, Hallgarten discoveered that potentially damaging documents had been removed before he was handed the materials, and later returned the their folders.


trying to deny certain people access?


	...After the publication of Die Grosse Politik, the Foreign Ministry sought to assure the widest possible dissiemination of the series' findings, both at home and abroad. Legation Secretary Freytag of its War Guilt Section had suggested as early as December 1919 a massive propaganda campaign to propagate the official German position on war guilt, but Bulow did not deem the moment right as the indiscriminate use of propaganda during the First Wolrd War had rendered large segments of the populace skeptical of any government-directed information. Nevertheless, Freytag clung to his plan to make certain "that this propaganda never be allowed to die."


this might be worth looking into more--how obvious was their propaganda?

	...the Foreign Ministry eventually decided to establish several independent bureaus under the umbrella of its Kreigshuldreferat. These eventually functioned on both an overt and a covert level; at the public level, they disseminated the official view on the origins of the war, while behind the scenes they sougt to promote those who followed the official line and to silence--indeed, eventually to hound out of office--those who put forth independent and/or unacceptable interpretations.


Foreign Ministry not doing Germany any favors.

If active measures, what would their intention be? First guess was they wanted it to be believable enough for the right to buy it and obvious enough for the left/socialists to be angry at it.

pg 19

	...And while much of the nation gradually had gotten over the initial shock of the harsh terms handed down at Versailles, the Allied demand in January 1921 for reparations in the amount of 226 billion Mark, with annual payments over the next 42 years, once again came to the aid of the Foreign Ministry's "revisionist" endeavors.


remember a few incidents like this--like Poincare showing up to occupy the Rhuhr. Depending on their level of influence in allied countries, could keep having them act in ways to "remind" Germany of the shame of the war and Versailles and incubate the Nazis. Would be worth looking into these incidents in more detail.


	The "general staff" remained the War Guilt Section of the Foreign Ministry. It was headed by Hans Freytag in 1919-20, Professor Richard von Delbruck in 1921-22, and Friedrich Stieve from 1922 until 1928. The bureau made the basic decisions as to wich publications crtitical of the official German line were to be attacked, by whom, and in which journals; or whether they were to be ignored.


Should look into these guys later.


pg 20

	The Kriegsschuldreferat was also active in attempting to influence the publication of archival materials in other countries. In 1924, Stieve produced a four-volume collection of the reports of the erstwhile Russian Ambassador in Paris, A. P Izolvsky, designed to show that these two entente powers had nurted "imperialistic war aims" against Germany. The core of the publication consisted of 500 secret documents, purchased by the Wilhelmstreasse for 48,000 Mark--in reality, a bribe paid to the archivist of the Soviet embassy at Paris to smuggle the materials out.


paying-off Soviets so they could create propaganda about Izolvsky?

pg 21 War Guilt Section founding intitutes like "Center for the Study of the Causes of the War" to spread propaganda

pg 22

	...Nor is it possible to gain any accurate insight into the number of idependent scholars and journalists engaged by the Wilhelmstrasse in a similar function. While Geiss speaks of a small army of such publicists, Heinemann tends toward a much smaller number. In the main, these writers were paid modest honorariums of perhaps seveeral hundred Mark in order to pen three of four articles per month for leading newspapers, which, in turn, passed them on to the provincial press. Most prominent among this group were the Munich journalist Hermann Lutz and the army's specialist on Belgium, Colonel Schwrtfeger; the latter was also paid by the Foreign Ministry to compile an eight-party guide to Die Grosse Politik for the nonprofessional reader One of the few foreign writers directly subsidized by the Wilhelmstrasse appears to have been Milos Boghitschewitsch, the former Serbian charge d'affaires to Germany, who wrote articles for the Foreign Office during the 1920s and who aparently was paid in that most rare of commodities at Berlin, gold.


buying off journalists for their campaign.


	It is striking that not a single eminent historian of the 1920s bothered to undertake serious research and publication on the origins of the war. I contrast to the post-1945 period, they left the debate by default in the hands of the Foreign Ministry and its minions.


what's up with that?


	In the main, the member organizations were patriotic clubs such as Rettet die Ehre and the Duetsch Fraunasschuss zuer Bekampfung der Krigschuldiuge, but they also included the Caritias-Verband, the World council of Churces, and the German City League.


The world council of churches involved?


	It is estimated, for example, that in 1925 alone, the Working Committee conducted 1,456 such undertakings in behalf of the reviionist campaign. Moreover, it effectively penetrated the daily press, maintaining contacts to no less than 1,500 newspapers through the 35 major news agencies in Berlin.


I wonder how many of these "press contacts" ended up supporting the Nazis?


pg 25 says World Council of Churches was aiding the "Foreign Ministry's campaign" around 1922. Since when did it become a KGB front? earliest I can find in Sword and Shield is 1961

pg 26

	As previously noted, Wegerer had been sent to the United States in 1925 to assist te Senate in a possible documentary series on the origins of the war; he also used the occasion to contact eminent historians such as Sidney B. Fay, Bernadotte E. Schmitt, William Langer, Carlton J. Hayes, and Ferdinand Schhevill. The immediate upshot was that the Foreign Ministry purchased 250 copies of Fay's sympathetic two-volume *The Origins of the War* and had its diplomatic represenatvie overseas dsitribute the books free of charge.


so they had some agents in the U.S., elsewhere overseas


	...It is impossible to pinpoint the effect of this propaganda, either in Germany or overseas. Needless to say, the cumulative effect of ten years of continuous activity in this area must have taken its toll. Several German states, such as Baden Bavaria, Sachen-Anhalt, Wurttemberg, and Waldeck, openly adopte ADV materials for classroom instruction. ...The DV, for its part, routinely organized talks at high schools and seminars at universities on the issue of the "war-guilt lie," and this moilization especially of the youth could only have paved the way for their favorable reception of Adolf Hitler's "revisionist ideas."


brainwashed a generation


	Likewise, the oversseas distribution of materials combting Article 231 of the Versailles treaty must have had its effects, however imprecise they may be to define. At least one generation of university students was raised on the apologias presentd them by historians such as Siney B. Fay and Harry E. Barnes in the United States, and writers such as Edmund Morel in England as wella s Victor Marguiritte and Alfred Fabre-luce in France. This pollution of American, British, and French historical understanding of the origins of the Great War must have helped to undermine faith in the need to maintain the irenic clauses of the 1919 treaty. It remains an open question whether it also contributed to isolationism in the United States and pro-appeasement thinking in England in the 1930s.


interesting--propaganda campaign actually successful overseas? maybe at least enough to make appeasement tenable. Seems like most of the propaganda now is saying Germany is entirely to blame for the war, e.g. Sally Marks saying Versailles "not tough enough"

	
	...The activities of both the Center for the Study of the Cause of the War and the Working Committee of German Associations lost much of their impact and political value after January 1933. Celebrating the fourth anniversary of his appointment as Chancellor, Hitler on January 30, 1937 informed the Reichstag that he was officially "revoking" the German signature on the document wherein a "weak government" had been "pressed" to accept Germany's guilt for the First World War. Therewith, the semi-official revisionist campaign was stripped of its reason to exist--or, more precisely, it was subsumed by the state.


Hitler came into power 1933 along with a shift in their propaganda


	pg 28

	...Furthermore, while the second World War for many non-German scholars merely served once more to "prove" Berlin's responsibility for the First, the tone in what emerged as teh Federal Republic of Germany (1949) was set again by historians such as erdmann, Herzfeld, Ritter, Rothfels, and Zechlin, who now adopted the line that while Hitler (rather than Germany) was to blame for the Second World War, no such blame could be attributed to the First.


seen some of these names--was Erdmann the "other guy" with access to Reizler's diary? an "Erdmann" was named as such by Fritz Stern. Ritter is a name I've seen before. Ritter said the war wasn't Bethman-Hollweg's fault.

	In reaching this stance, they seconded Wergerer, ignored Albertini, and vilified Fischer.


intersting they attack Fischer but ignore Albertini--Albertini strikes me as an honest man.


Herwig says there was also an investigation into the origins of the war by the Reichstag, independent of the foriegn ministry, although it became politicized. It did investigations but Hermann Goring dissolved it after August 30, 1932 and "ordered the dstruction of all available published volumes of its findings." Says "the combersome nature of the investigative process was due, in part, to the Foreign ministry's desire to keep documents tied up in committee and thus from public scrutiny for an indefinite period."


	pg 30

	...The most sensational investigation was that of the second subcommittee, charged with evaluating the possibility of a negotiate peace in 1917-18. 


this is something I'd like to know... Herwig says Karl Helferich and Hindenburg were involved, but all they did is grandstand and blame socialists.

	...Hindenurg ended his soliloquy by announcing hat the "good core" of the army, that is, its officer corps, could not be blamed for the defeat; rather, it had been "stabbed in the back" (von hinten erdolcth) by certain pacifist and socialist elements at the home front. Therewith, a legend was officially born, one that was to have fatal consequences for the Republic.


so Hindenburg started this?

	Unsurprisingly, the patriotic self-censors in the Foreign Ministry barred publication of even a single volume of the findings of the second subcommittee for frear of adverse reaction both overseas and among the German clergy; further, they assured that even the upublished material would not see the light of day by indiscriminately stamping "secret" on 28 of the 37 folders of documents.

	...The third subcommittee, dealing with possible German violations of international law, was most closely supervised by the Foreign Ministry, which provided as "expert" none other than Dr. Johhanees Kriege, the erstwhile head of the legal section of the Imperial Foreign Office. In fac, Kriege undertook numerous visits to the exiled Kaiser Wilhelm II at Haus Doorn in the Netherlands, ostensibly to keep the empoeror informed of his efforts.


Foreign Minister continues to fuck everything up

Kriege worth looking into?

	pg 32

	...The admittedly brutal deportation of Belgian workers was attributed solely to the inadequate organization of German transports. When the Belgian government formally protested these mental gymnastics at Berlin in 1927, the German military reacted by suggesting that the government buy up all remaining volumes of the findings of the third subcommittee and distribute them gratis at home.

worth looking into--what exactly did they do in Belgium?


	...Whearas the Foreign Ministry had refused to hand over only potentially incriminating documents to the Untersuchungsausschuss, the army and navy between 1924 and 1928 proved adamant in their refusals to assist in any way the work of the fourth subcommittee dealing with the collapse in 1918. ...Major Otto von Stulpnagel of the Defense Ministry bluntly wanred that any opening of army archives would have "long-range consequences" for German policies not only domestically but also with regard to the Reich's "future world standing."


Army and Navy also acting sketchy.


	Hence it was decided that official affidavits on the stratgic ramifications of the  great spring offensive in France in 1918 would be handled by the former general staff cheif of Army Group Crown Prince Rupprecht, General Hermann von Kuhl, and on the politcal and military implications of "Operation Michael" by Colonel Schwertfeger, one of the Foreign Ministry's paid publicists; ...Kuhl, as was to be expected, reiterated Hinidenburg's brazen "stab-in-the back" theory, adn argued that the army had been quite prepared to continue the war into 1919--had it not been for the systematic revolutionary planning of the Socialists.


Have I seen the name Kuhl before? looks like they were trying to cover up the decision to continue the war


	Delbruck countered by arguing that General Erich Ludendorff's "total war" strategy, which had gambled all on a decisive military victory in 1918, had greivously overestimated German resolve as well as reosurces, and thereby had directly contributed to the collapse. By reversing the relationship between goals and means, Ludendorff had displayed a shocking degree of "unbridled egoism, megalomania, and a lack of responsibility." When Delbruck's statemetns found their way into the press in 1924, Schwertfeger, Colonel Wolfgan Foerster of the Reichsarchiv at Postdam, and the historian Hans Herzfedl viciously attacked Delbruck for his "unfounded, superficial, and misleading" interpretation. The so-called "Ludendorff controversy" reached its climax on November and December 1924, wheen the Cabinet twice agreed to sustain General Hans von Seeckt's veto of the planned publication of the findings of the fourth subcommittee for fear that this might harm "the moral fiber of the army."


did Ludendorff benefit from politicization?


pg 34

	The most controversial investigation, of course, was that the first subcommittee, charged with assessing Germany's role in the July crisis. There, after all, was the heart of Article 231 of the Versailles treaty The Foreign Ministry was acutely sensitive to possible Allied charges that this committee was stacked with its minions, and hence the Wilhelmstrasse encouraged the Reichstag to engage "nuetral" experts. The choice fell upon the Munic publicist Hermann Lutz and the Freiburg jurist Hermann Kantorowicz. Despite the fact that Lutz was closely associated with the revisionist campaign conducted by the Foreign Ministry, his affidavit, completed in 1924, proved embarrassingly balanced. Lutz placed Serbia and Russia t the top of the list of those responsible for the war, closely followed by Austria-Hungary, and then by the rest of the parties involved. Lutz's evaluation of the Habsburg policy of brinkmanship in July 1914 at once drew the ire of fellow investigators Max von Montgelas and Richard von Delbruck, both itimately involved with the Foreign Ministry's revisionist endeavors. Indeed, the Wilhelmstrasse "encouraged" Lutz to "revise" his affidavit; in its second form, the Gutachten placed Vienna in a more favorable light. Nevertheless, the Foreign Ministry again used its veto power to delay publication of Lutz's affidavit for half a decade (until 1930).


Foreign Ministry shooting itself in the foot.


pg 35 Wilhelmstrasse attacked and tried to censor this guy Kantorowicz who investigated Germany's role in starting the war. He had blamed German politicians for ignoring peace efforts from other countries, and other things. Later he was one of the 25 professors dismissed by the Hitler regime.

	...Kantorowic'z earlier work "The Spirit of English Policy and the Phantom of Germany's Encirclement," published in 1929, was among the books burned on the Nazi's pyre of ignorance in May 1933.


Seems like they exploited national pride in this case to get people to do stupid things. If their national pride is hurt and they can be convinced certain ideas or people are insulting their national pride, it's easier to get them to attack those people or ideas.


pg 36

	...And as recently as February 1964, West Germany's Foreign Minister, Gerhard Schroder, acting up on the recommendations of Gerhard Ritter and Karl Deitrich Erdmann, formally rescinded Goethe Institute travel funds awarded Fritz Fischer for a planned lecture tour of the United States, a tour that Ritter equated with "a national tragedy."


probably only helping Fischer. I guess they were politicizing history, making it harder for people to figure out the truth.


	...Apparently, the Foreign Ministry was quite prepared once more to take on the role of patriotic self-censor. It was only through the efforts of a dozen American scholars, led by Klaus Epstein, that Fischer's visit came about. Ritter not only spoke of what he decried as Fischer's penchant for "political masochism," but poured out all his bitterness in a letter to Klaus Epstein's father, Fritz, a scholar also hounded out of German academia after 1933, by referring to Fischer as "an old Nazi, who had so quickly managed to convert to democracy" after 1945.


I think Mika would call this "a gift."

It is interesting they attack Fischer like this but ignore Albertini, even though (I think Herwig said) Fischer mostly just re-introduced Albertini. It's worth looking into Fischer and Epstein more. Whatever Fischer's motivations, it looks like he caused a fight among historians.

Do they use "divide and conquer" among historians and other professionals? If they can create a fight, they can drag otherwise well-meaning historians into it at well. Maybe Herwig himself was caught up in this around 1987.


pg 37

	Memoirs and Historical Falsification

	Last but not least, attention should be drawn to several attempts to suppress or to "revise" memoirs after the First World War. One of the most celebrated cases involved General Helmuth von Moltke the Younger. The former Chief of the General Staff had died in 1916, and his widow with the assistance of Rudolf Steiner, the founder of anthroposophy, had prepared by the spring of 1919 a detailed memoir that promised to shed light on Moltke's role before and during the July crisis. Before the book could go to press, however, Eliza von Moltke was paid a visit by "certain persons" who advised her not to publish her husband's papers. Stiener, in turn, was informed by the Prussian envoy at Stuttgart, Legation Secretary Hans Adolf von Moltke (!), that "Berlin did not desire" General von Moltke's memoirs in print; an unnamed general, who had served both Wilhelm II and Moltke, also sought out Steiner to caution against publication of the book. These efforts were successful, and the Erinnerungen eventually put out by Eliza von Moltke in 1922 proved devoid of any information on the origins of the war. Moreover, Moltke's papers thereafter were so carefully "ordered" by self-appointed patriotic censors that, in the words of John Rohl, "they contain not a single document worth reading from the pre-War period."


This is interesting... not much information though. "Certain persons?"

This could be out of character for the censors in post-WW1 Germany too. Didn't Ludendorff point to Moltke as one of the people to "stab Germany in the back?" If anybody stabbed Germany in the back it would be him. So you'd think they'd want his papers published.

	The same is rumored about the papers of Field Marshal von Hindenburg, which allegedly were "ordered" by the late nationalist historian Walther Hubatsch; the Hindenburg family to date has refused to deposit them with the Federal Military Archive at Friedburg.


Still keeping this papers under wraps? at least as of 1987. Apparently, the Nazi conspiracy is still alive! Hitler must have all the papers in his secret base in Argentina.


	Three important collections of papers barely escaped destruction. Those of Admiral Georg Alexander von Muller, Chief of the Navy Cabinet to 1918, were earmarked for destruction upon the officer's death--an order fortunately not executed by this son, Sven. Yet when published by Walter Gorlitz after the Second World War, the diaries incredibly appeared in a "carefully expurgated version," although the authentic text is highly readable.


Worth checking out?


	Likewise, in the case of Kurt Reizler, Chancellor von Bethmann Holweg's intimus, the papers were slated for destruction. The conservative historian Hans Rothfels both during the Second World War and thereafter advised Rizler against publication in order not to repon the debate concerning the origins of the Great War. After Riezler's death in 1965, his brother destroyed what he termed "private" parts of the Nachlass, and neither the Foreign Office at Bonn nor the Federal Archive at Koblenz could persuade Walter Riezler to turn the papers over to them. It was only through the repeated pressures of historians both in Germany and abroad to secure the critical memoir that Reizler's sister, Mary White, eventually consented to publication. Not surprisingly, the Reizler materials were carefully "ordered" by Karl Dietrich Erdmann in book form; thereafter, they remained closed to scholars at the Bundesarchiv at Koblenz for another eight years. Upon becoming available, the very originality especially of Reizler's notes during the July crisis was challeneged in 1983.


I knew there was some weird shit going on with Reizler's notes.


	...A final curiosity is the case of Prince Philipp zu Eulenburg-Hertefeld. ...Eulenburg had entrusted his voluminous correspondence to Professor Johanes Haller


then Haller keeps finding excuses to delay publishing them, finally published in 1976.


	...It would be tedious to continue to list similar cases of suppression or revision of memoirs and diaries. Suffice it to say that these examples should provide an insight into the business of patriotic self-censorship during the Weimar Republic and thereafter. What has been entirely omitted in this article are the cases where editors were engaged to ghostwrite memoirs--such as those of Admirals Karl Donitz and Erich Raeder--in order to preclude public debate on vital issues of national interest.


It's weird that there's so much "patriotic self-censorship" so long after the war.


pg 40 -- talks about possible motivations

	...In short, the high bureaucracy was not interested in personnel purges in 1919. Nor were the dominant Social Democrats. In fact, the SPD never demanded that the senior statesmen and diplomats of the empire be held accountable. The resulting irony was that the Republic'sCommittee of Enquiry, for example, relied for many of its "expert" affidavits upon the very men who had been in positions of power and responsibility in July 1914, men such as Gottleib von Jagow and Johanes Kreig. By failing to clean house in 1919, by failing to confront the matter of Germany's role in the origins of the First World War brutally and honestly, and, above all, by failing to chase the patriotic censors from their temples of influence, the first leaders of the Weimar Republic did their country a great disservice.


What's up with that?


	...Conversely, the patriotic censors with their campaign of obfuscation, delay, preemptive historiography, and mass propaganda made quite certain that the issue would never be allowed to die, as Hans Freytag had foreseen as early as 1919. Max Weber, despite his signature on the "professors' memorandum" of May 1919, in time came to lament this turn of events. "Every document that comes to light after decades," he sadly noted, "revives the undignified squabbling, the hatred and anger, instead of at least *decently* burying the war and its end."


	...Yet the war-guilt game was dangerous because, as Karl Kautsky had put it in 1919, it was "not only a scholarly question for historians," but "an eminently practical question for politicians." For the authors of the war, the answer to the question of who was responsible amounted to a "death sentence" as they surely would be "cast among the politically dead. . . , stripped of all power."


So a selfish-motivation was possible for war-guilt propaganda

pg 42

	In retrospect, the revisionist campaign conducted by men such as Bulow, Draeger, Freytag, Montgelas, Shucking, and Thimme, amont others, retarded critical appraisal of the origins of the war until the 1960s. A certain orthodoxy on the war-guilt issue developed; Europe, in the immortal words of David Lloyd Geroge, had simply "slid" into the war in 1914 with roughly equal amounts of ignorance and naivete. It simply cannot be stressed enough that by linking the war guilt issue very early on to the campaign to "revise" the Versailles treaty, the patriotic censors virtually precluded sober and rational investigation into the matter.


Versaille made arguing against war-guilt a matter of life-and-death for the country of Germany.

It seems like all they had to do was show that their politicians acted against the will and best interests of the public and turn them over. The main argument against the Versailles treaty, as far as I can tell, is that the German people didn't ask for the war and didn't want the war--their politicians did. While they shcemed to keep the war going, Germans were protesting and got the Reichstag to call for a general peace. The argument is that you shouldn't punish a whole country of people for the actions of a few politicians who were acting against them in the first place.

If they had actually been able to get out the truth about the origins of the war and had better representation at Versailles, they might have been able to argue that. But I guess the Foreign Ministry had other ideas.


	...Last but not least, both Bulow and Stresemann realized that the Wilhelmstrasse's campaign against Article 231 of the Versailles treaty also served a highly useful domestic purpose: the "national alibi" constituted a convenient integration factor by rallying the political spectrum from Vorwarts to Volkisher Beobachter, that is, from Social Democrat to National Socialist, round this one great patriotic issue.


Could be used to unite Germany, but also lead to a dangerous kind of nationalism...

	An additional domestic benefit was that the vigorous persuance of "revisionism" on the part of the Wilhelmstrasse might take some of the thunder out of the charges of "defeatism" and "softness" constantly leveled against the Republic by its right-wing detractors over the issue of "fulfilment" of the Versailles treaty, and thereby benefit Sresemann's flexible and moderate revisionist diplomacy.

	Unfortunately, the events of 1932-33 were to sshow that this national consensus was tenuous at best; the seamingly diametrically opposed poles of extreme nationalism and national inferiority (engendered by the war-guilt charge) were to be brutally but effectively exploited by the extreme right, the real "winners" of the revisionist campaign. In short, by delaying an open and honest discussion on the origins of the First World War for four decades, the self-censors did their party to bring about a political climate receptive to the radical "revisionist" ideas of Adolf Hitler and his supporters.

	At the risk of belaboring the obvious, I will conclude this overview of how Clio was deceived in Germany by suggesting that the moral and institutional lessons to be learned have not lost any of their crispness and validity over the decades. It servers no national interest to obfuscate and derail intellectual inquiry. Miscalculated risks are rarely glossed over simply by selectively editing pertinent documents and by having paid publicists tout the desired line through government-controlled presses and publishers. "PPreemptive historiography" may succeed in the short run; over time, it is likely to be uncovered as the sham that it is. In the final analysis, it was nothing short of a tragedy that, in the words of Hermann Hesse, "90 or 100 prominent men" conspired in the supposed interests of the state "to deceive the people on this vital question of national interest." Nor was Hesse in doubt as to the effectiveness of the campaign of "patriotic self-censhorship," informing Thomas Mann in 1931 of his opinion that "of 1,000 Germans, even today 999 still know nothing of [our] war guilt." Little wonder, then, that Fritz Fischer's Griff nach der Wletmacht had such an explosive impact precisely thirty years later.