



converting "imperialist war" into "class struggle:"




https://www.marxists.org/archive/luxemburg/1915/xx/theses.htm
	World peace cannot be assured by projects utopian or, at bottom, reactionary, such as tribunals of arbitration by capitalist diplomatists, diplomatic “disarmament” conventions, “the freedom of the seas,” abolition of the right of maritime arrest, “the United States of Europe,” a “customs union for central Europe,” buffer states, and other illusions. Imperialism, militarism and war can never be abolished nor attenuated so long as the capitalist class exercises, uncontested, its class hegemony. The sole means of successful resistance, and the only guarantee of the peace of the world, is the capacity for action and the revolutionary will of the international proletariat to hurl its full weight into the balance



https://www.marxists.org/archive/luxemburg/1917/04/oldmole.htm
	The grudging respect of the German and Austro-Hungarian governments for the ‘cadgers and conspirators’ and the nervous tension with which our ruling classes receive every utterance by Cheidze and by the workers’ and soldiers’ soviet concerning the question of war and peace are now a tangible confirmation of the fact which only yesterday met the uncomprehending opposition of the socialists from the A.G. This was the fact that the way out of the blind alley of the world war led not through diplomatic ‘agreements’ and Wilsonian messages, but solely and exclusively through the revolutionary action of the proletariat. The victors at Tannenberg and Warsaw now tremblingly await their own ‘liberation’ from the choking noose of war by the Russian proletariat, by the ‘mob in the street’!

	Of course even with the greatest heroism the proletariat of one single country cannot loosen this noose. The Russian Revolution is growing of its own accord into an international problem. For the peace efforts of the Russian workers bring them into acute conflict not only with their own bourgeoisie, but also with the English, French and Italian bourgeoisie. The rumblings of the bourgeois press in all the Entente countries – The Times, Matin, Corriere della Sera, etc. – show that the capitalists of the West, these stout-hearted champions of ‘democracy’ and of the rights of the ‘small nations’, are watching, with gnashing teeth and hourly mounting rage, the advances made by the proletarian revolution that has checked the glorious era of the undivided rule of imperialism in Europe.




http://socialistreview.org.uk/393/revolution-trenches
	...Lenin argued that live and let live and draft dodging should not simply continue as the only possible way for individual soldiers to survive through to the peace, but that revolutionaries should set themselves the task of turning fraternisation and the will to survive into politically conscious movements to transfer power into the hands of the revolutionary proletariat.




-------



effect of war on public opinion:


https://www.britannica.com/place/Italy/World-War-I-and-fascism
	The war was deeply unpopular both among the troops—mostly conscripted peasants who were undernourished and fighting for a cause few could understand—and among the civilian population back home, which included almost one million workers in arms factories who were also subject to military discipline. Many rebelled within the army. (It has been estimated that some 470,000 conscripts resisted call-up, 310,000 committed acts of indiscipline under arms, and 300,000 deserted.) More than one million soldiers came before military tribunals before a postwar amnesty was granted. Many once again saw the Italian state only as a repressive institution. Antiwar disturbances struck Milan in May 1917, and serious bread riots took place among the industrial workers of Turin in August 1917. Troops occupied Turin and took four days to restore order; some 50 demonstrators and 10 soldiers were killed in the clashes.




------


Lenin support for German revolution, propagandizing German army:


https://translate.google.com/translate?hl=en&sl=de&u=http://www.spiegel.de/spiegel/spiegelspecialgeschichte/d-54841257.html&prev=search
	...slowly it dawned on the German strategists that in the end they would be the losers of the purposive alliance between Lenin and the Hohenzollern empire.

	In the end, Wilhelm's generals did not even dare to relocate soldiers from the Ukraine or the Baltic to the Western Front because the men were meanwhile regarded as unreliable: they sympathized with Lenin's revolution. A request from the Bolsheviks to have 20,000 machine guns, 200,000 rifles, and 500 million cartridges was rejected by the Supreme Command, saying that there was a danger that the weapons "might later be used against us."

	For Lenin calculated as coolly as the Foreign Office, and while he cooperated with the Empire in Moscow during the summer, he spared neither money nor expense to support those comrades in the Reich who were aiming for a German Soviet republic.

	The Germans should have been warned - it was the same policy of revolution that they had supported in the years before when it was against the Czar. 