https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Erich_von_Falkenhayn
	General Erich Georg Anton von Falkenhayn (11 September 1861 – 8 April 1922) was the Chief of the German General Staff during the First World War from September 1914 until 29 August 1916. He was removed in the late summer of 1916 after the failure at the battle of Verdun, the opening of the Allied offensive on the Somme, the Brusilov Offensive and the entry of Romania into the war. He was later given important field commands in Romania and Syria. His reputation as a war leader was attacked in Germany during and after the war, especially by the faction which supported Hindenburg. Falkenhayn held that Germany could not win the war by a decisive battle but would have to reach a compromise peace; his enemies said he lacked the resolve necessary to win a decisive victory. Falkenhayn's relations with the Chancellor Bethmann-Hollweg were troubled and undercut Falkenhayn's plans.


this guy legit?


https://archive.org/stream/FischerFritzGermanysAimsInTheFirstWorldWar/Fischer,%20Fritz%20-%20Germany%E2%80%99s%20Aims%20in%20the%20First%20World%20War_djvu.txt

what does Fischer think about him?


Falkenyan would spar with Moltke (from Herwig's book)

so he would be familiar with his work

but, harder to say if he's trustworthy or not


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Erich_von_Falkenhayn
	In 1919, he retired from the army and withdrew to his estate, where he wrote his autobiography and several books on war and strategy. His war memoirs were translated into English as The German General staff and Its Critical Decisions, 1914–1916. With the benefit of hindsight, he remarked that the German declarations of war on Russia and France in 1914 were "justifiable but overly-hasty and unnecessary".


also, Herwig says Holweg, Falkenhayn and Moltke were the ones who decided for war and Mobilization.

Anikka says there were "intrigues" against Falkenhayn after he was replaced, and that he was aligned with Ludendorff and Hindenberg

https://www.google.com/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=24&ved=0ahUKEwi8lpGUxOXWAhVEyyYKHQPcAL04FBAWCC0wAw&url=http%3A%2F%2Fjmss.org%2Fjmss%2Findex.php%2Fjmss%2Farticle%2Fdownload%2F420%2F426&usg=AOvVaw07yBFOtjx-hFSzC5Y19-XC
	It must be pointed out yet again, that the argument that the war was caused by “military timetables,” so frequently enunciated by historians, 34 is specious. It puts the cart before the horse. Of course, mobilization was critical. Any General Staff that relaxed its mobilization schedule would find itself at a disadvantage. As the French chief of staff, General Joseph Joffre, warned the Cabinet on 31 July 1914, every twenty- four-hour delay in mobilization translated into the loss of fifteen to twenty kilometers of territory. 35 In Vienna, Chief of the General Staff Conrad von Hötzendorf for years had pushed the military option, only to be rebuffed year after year for his “war, war, war” mentality. 36 In Berlin, Generals von Falkenhayn and von Moltke likewise advised both Kaiser Wilhelm II and Chancellor von Bethmann Hollweg on speedy mobilization during the July Crisis.


so he seems sketchy there--not sure what to make of him


from Herwig Marne book:

	Despite the repeated proclamations of “decisive victories,” the never-ending reports of “fleeing” French armies, and the hosannas that accompanied them at the OHL, there were doubters. One of these was Prussian war minister Erich von Falkenhayn. As early as 30 August, while visiting Sixth Army in Lorraine, he had expressed “doubts about the magnitude of successes to date.” He then toured the fronts of the German center armies to gain firsthand knowledge of the course of the war. The “real war” stood in stark contrast with the news bulletins from the front. Early in September, after having inspected the right-wing armies, Falkenhayn grew even more apprehensive. What was being reported “is not a battle won; that is [a] planned withdrawal.” There was no physical evidence of victory. “Show me the trophies or the prisoners of war,” he viciously demanded of Moltke.


it does seem like Falkenhayn helped make Molke more nervous


although, Falkenhayn also advised to end the war after Marne (from Herwig book):

	there were those at Imperial Headquarters who fully understood that the time had come in the fall of 1914 to end the Great Folly. Field Marshal Gottlieb von Haeseler, activated for field duty at the tender age of seventy-eight, advised Wilhelm II to sheath the sword. “It seems to me that the moment has come which we must try to end the war.”37 The kaiser refused the advice. Moltke’s successor, Erich von Falkenhayn, by 19 November had reached the same conclusion as Haeseler before him. Victory lay beyond reach. It would be “impossible,” he lectured Bethmann Hollweg, to “beat” the Allied armies “to such a point where we can come to a decent peace.” By continuing the war, Germany “would run the danger of slowly exhausting ourselves.”38 The chancellor rejected the counsel.


http://spartacus-educational.com/FWWfalkenhayn.htm
	Falkenhayn was appointed Prussian war minister in 1913 and succeeded Hermuth von Moltke as Chief of General Staff in September 1914. Falkenhayn disagreed with General Paul von Hindenburg and Eric von Ludendorff about concentrating German efforts to defeat Russia. Instead he believed the war would be won in the west and concentrated all available forces against France and Britain.


that's kindof suspicious


https://books.google.com/books?id=nAFfAr3dU_8C&pg=PA79&lpg=PA79&dq=%22One+must+have+a+good+deal+of+trust+in+God+and+count+on+the+Russian+revolution+as+an+ally%22&source=bl&ots=QfjTktDKQ8&sig=h3E_vNsnPZ1WQAsvRsLZuwOs9O8&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwja767u89XWAhUCTCYKHXE5BfUQ6AEIKTAB#v=onepage&q=hollweg&f=false
	What is striking about the 'blank cheque' is not that it was issued but that it was indeed blank. The council had made little effort to discuss the implications of what it was going. Its decisions followed from previous events rather than from a projection as to the future. Falkenhayn wrote to Moltke expressing the view that neither he nor Bethmann Hollweg beleived that Austria-Hungary would follow through the forceful language which it had so far employed. But Bethmann Holweg had done little to inform himself on precisely this point.


but he was wrong


http://germanhistorydocs.ghi-dc.org/sub_document.cfm?document_id=810
	February 1, 1916

	Today General von Falkenhayn explained his view of the situation to me as follows:

	1) Russia
	Although the internal situation is bad, there is no prospect of a complete collapse in the near future. The army will not be capable of conducting any larger offensive even early in the year. Their worth is indicated by the fact that the Bessarabian army, formed from the best army corps and fully rested, has not been able to accomplish much against the Austrian troops, who are not particularly good. 

	2) France
	Internal conditions and morale in the country are not good. Army is good. Its morale is better than a year ago.

	3) England
	As is shown by the armed services bill, England is determined to fight this war to the bitter end. 


was Falkenhayn pushing for the idea of using the Russian revolution on the Eastern front?


	...6) Because of our own economic and internal situation, it is crucial that the war comes to an end before the winter of 1916-17. There is no certain prospect that our enemies will be willing to conclude a peace hitherto or that we will be able to force them to conclude a peace by our military attacks. Therefore, we have to employ all the military means at our disposal against our enemies. The only and the best tool of this sort is unlimited submarine warfare. We can no longer choose if we want to use this tool or not. We are simply forced to use it. 


did he call for unrestricted submarine warfare?


http://www.history.com/this-day-in-history/germany-resumes-unrestricted-submarine-warfare
	On January 31, 1917, Bethmann Hollweg went before the German Reichstag government and made the announcement that unrestricted submarine warfare would resume the next day, February 1. The destructive designs of our opponents cannot be expressed more strongly. We have been challenged to fight to the end. We accept the challenge. We stake everything, and we shall be victorious.


------


http://www.historylearningsite.co.uk/world-war-one/military-commanders-of-world-war-one/erich-von-falkenhayn/
	Erich von Falkenhayn is most associated with the Battle of Verdun in 1916 – one of World War One’s bloodiest battles. Falkenhayn was criticised for his tactics at Verdun and after the war he tried to justify the tactics that he used – that led to the deaths of tens of thousands of German soldiers.


did he throw Verdun?

	...When he returned to Germany, Falkenhayn served on the General Staff.  In 1913, he was held in such regard that he was appointed Minister of War for Prussia. In this position he had to serve with one of Germany’s most famous military men – von Moltke – and the two did not get on as they argued over most everything.


If he were a rival of Moltke, he would have some influence over him


	...As a strategist, Falkenhayn was considered to be cautious and a man who did not want to take risks.

	This approach was shown in the 1915 campaign on the Eastern Front. General von Luderndorff had developed a plan that, if successful, would have trapped and effectively destroyed the Russian army on that front. However, it was a bold plan that left Falkenhayn feeling uncomfortable as it has too many ‘ifs’ and ‘buts’ to it. As a result, he refused to support Luderndorff and gave his support to a more conservative plan that gave the Russian army plenty of room to evade the German army  – and it gave the German army room to withdraw if it went wrong. Luderndorff did not forgive Falkenhayn for rejecting his plan.


this is suspicious. Says something about Ludendorff too (comes off as a puppet, not an agent) (maybe a puppet of Hindenberg? what did Hindenberg do with this plan?)


	...However, Falkenhayn believed that the war was going to be won or lost on the Western Front. He believed that he could launch a decisive blow against the French and destroy their esprit de corps by taking out the forts in Verdun that had always offered France defence from attack. These forts had survived intact throughout the 1914 German attack. In 1916, Falkenhayn believed that they were ripe for attack. His plan was nothing more than a war of attrition – to wear down the defences of the French and bleed their army white.


was he responsible for trench warfare? for the war lasting so long?


	Falkenhayn believed that if Verdun was captured, then the whole of France would surrender as Verdun, in the minds of the French, was impregnable.


that sounds dumb--an excuse to throw troops at a fortress?


	Falkenhayn’s plan for Verdun relied on one simple thing – German success. In fact, by the time the battle had ended, German casualties were horrific. If the French had been bled white, so had the German army. The German army never fully recovered from Verdun and after the war Falkenhayn was blamed for this – especially his overwhelming confidence that his strategy would work as a letter he wrote to William II indicated.


so he throw troops at Verdun and destroyed the German army and calls for unrestricted submarine warfare--he is another person who started the war then sabotaged it for Germany


	...Falkenhayn will always be most remembered for the Battle of Verdun and the slaughter that took place there.


------


https://webcache.googleusercontent.com/search?q=cache:n2uuDQbVk5MJ:https://www.britannica.com/event/Battle-of-Verdun+&cd=5&hl=en&ct=clnk&gl=us
	In Falkenhayn’s view, Britain’s “real weapons” in the war were the French, Russian, and Italian armies. He regarded Russia as already paralyzed and Italy as unlikely to affect the outcome of the war, concluding, “Only France remains.” 


he wanted to shift the war from Russia to France

	...Local command of the operation was given to Crown Prince William, the eldest son of William II.


so the monarchs can look bad

	... As the French defense was reorganized, the Germans captured the undefended Fort Douaumont, arguably the most formidable of the strongpoints surrounding Verdun. Eight months would pass and much blood would be shed before the French could reclaim the fort.


how long did Verdun last?


	...The Germans had failed to gain an immediate decision at Verdun, and they soon realized that the British army was preparing an attack on the Somme. For the next four months, they kept the Battle of Verdun going with furious tenacity in order to disorganize the attack being prepared by the Allies in Picardy. 


what exactly is going on here? did they decide to focus even more on Verdun instead of meet the counter-attack?


	...On June 1 the Germans attacked Vaux and Thiaumont, two strongpoints in the French line on the right bank. After days of back-and-forth combat, the Germans captured both positions on June 9, but they were unable to carry their attack through to the defensive works south of Thiaumont. Fighting on the left bank was largely inconclusive, but on June 15 the French reclaimed roughly a little more than a half mile (one kilometre) of trenches on Le Mort Homme. Such minor gains, which came at an enormous cost in lives, would typify the horrors of trench warfare on the Western Front.


it turned into trench warfare

	...The preliminaries of the great Franco-British offensive on the Somme started on June 24 with a weeklong artillery barrage. The general Allied infantry assault began on July 1, and the British suffered nearly 60,000 casualties—with 20,000 killed—on the first day alone.


wow


	...From February 21 to June 15, the French army had fielded 66 divisions at Verdun; by December 1916, roughly 75 percent of the French army had seen action on the Meuse. From February through July, the Germans had used 43 divisions. French guns at Verdun fired over 10,000,000 rounds with the field artillery, over 1,000,000 medium-calibre rounds, and 600,000 large-calibre rounds. At the conclusion of this enormous expenditure of blood and treasure, the lines were little changed from where they had been in early February.


It's like it was just a meat-grinder for the French and German troops while the Russian revolution was going on... is that what Poincarre's treaty was for? They could steer the war so that the German command would have no choice but to "hope for the Russian revolution" on the Eastern front. They could do this just to cut down German numbers so they don't have a chance against Russia/panic and fund the Bolsheviks more


	...In September, Gen. Charles Mangin, who had held command of a section of the French defensive line from Fleury to the right bank of the Meuse from June 22, proposed a scheme to liberate the Verdun region. Nivelle approved, and that offensive was initiated on October 21 with an artillery barrage across a broad front. An infantry assault followed on October 24, with three divisions advancing behind a creeping artillery barrage. By that evening the French had retaken Douaumont along with 6,000 German prisoners, and by November 2 the fort at Vaux was once again in French hands. Mangin was a gifted strategist, but he was widely regarded as a spendthrift when it came to the lives of his men, and his commitment to offensive warfare at any cost earned him the nickname “the Butcher.”


reminds me of Foch... anything going on with Mangin "the Butcher?"


	...Over 10 months in 1916, the two armies at Verdun suffered over 700,000 casualties, including some 300,000 killed. The pastoral landscape surrounding the city had been permanently transformed, and nine villages—Beaumont, Bezonvaux, Cumières, Douaumont, Fleury, Haumont, Louvemont, Ornes, and Vaux—were entirely destroyed. After the war the villages were memorialized as having “died for France” and, although uninhabited, continued to be administered by mayors to preserve their existence as administrative entities. The unknown dead were commemorated at the Douaumont Ossuary, a monument completed in 1932 that contains the remains of 150,000 unidentified French and German soldiers.


all for what?


	...In the 21st century the French Interior Ministry estimated that over 10 million shells remained in the soil around Verdun, and bomb-clearing units continued to remove some 40 tons of unexploded munitions from the area annually. Especially dangerous were chemical rounds, which were largely indistinguishable from explosive shells


that makes them "legal!"


	...their contents retained their toxicity over time, and they were prone to leak when discovered and handled. It was estimated that at existing rates of clearance, les demineurs (“the deminers”) would be uncovering and disposing of ordnance in the Verdun area for centuries to come.


------


http://digitalcommons.brockport.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1000&context=hashtaghistory
	However, by the end of the war this exclusive power of the Kaiser was superseded by Ludendorff.Moltke was replaced by Erich von Falkenhayn, whom the Kaiser personally knew and trusted. The appointment of Falkenhayn was not well received by the rest of the High Command, and he became increasingly loathed as the war progressed and Germany failed to break through in the West.  Despite Falkenhayn’s flaws (he was known to be a gambler), the Kaiser almost never attempted to alter Falkenhayn’s outlook while he was Chief of the General Staff.


why did the Kaiser favor Falkenhayn over the objections of the rest of the General Staff?


	...General Falkenhayn believed that Germany should focus its efforts on breaking through in the Western Front. They were close to achieving this at the Marne, and he believed that by transferring troops from the East to the West, that break through could be achieved.  However, General Ludendorff and his like-minded partner Paul Von Hindenburg believed that Germany’s forces should concentrate on the Eastern Front since they had already achieved major victories over the Russians at the Battles of Tannenberg, Lodz, and the Masurian Lakes in 1914-1915. Ludendorff was adamant that if Falkenhayn diverted troops to the Eastern Front, he would be able to completely encircle the Russians at Lodz at the bend of Vistula River and achieve the knockout blow that Germany sought.39Falkenhayn, however, was narrowly focused on the West.He dismissed Ludendorff’s pleas and after the war commented on the subject stating that, “It was a grave mistake to believe that our western enemies would give way, if, and because Russia was beaten. No decision in the East, even though it were as thorough as it was possible to imagine, could spare us from fighting to a conclusion in the West.”


After Marne, Falkenhayn wanted to focus on a "break through" on Western front. Ludendorff and Hindenburg (how much/in what way was he involved?) wants to attack Russia (this was shortly after Tannenberg). But Falkenhany was "narrowly focused" on the west (what does that mean exactly?).

His logic seems strange--"a victory in the east wouldn't spare us from fighting to a conslusion in the west," but that goes both ways, doesn't it? What was he justification for focusing on the western front?

He was advising Hollweg about the "internal situation" in Russia ("Although the internal situation is bad, there is no prospect of a complete collapse in the near future."). Maybe to other generals he would justify his actions by "relying on the Russian revolution."


	Falkenhayn was the Chief of the General Staff and outranked Ludendorff.  He ignored Ludendorff’s protests and launched a second assault on the French city of Ypres, which was repulsed with heavy casualties.


Ypres another waste of human life?


	Yet even after this defeat, Falkenhayn’s resolve did not waver. As a result, by the end of 1915 the Russian armies were severely weakened but crucially still in the field, while Germany continued to fight an exhausting war on two fronts.


Russian armies "severely weakened" by the end of 1915. How close were they to defeat by then? Did Falkenhayn do anything particularly egregious by not pushing on the eastern front?


	The commanders in the Eastern Theatre were appalled by this series of unfortunate events and resorted to name-calling and petty hostility to Falkenhayn.


apparently whatever he did was "appalling" to some


	In October 1915, Falkenhayn sought to support Austria in an attack against Serbia and wanted to pull troops from the east to support the endeavor.


so it's not just an "obsession with the west," he seems to want to pull troops away from fighting Russia. Is there anything interesting with the timing of this?


	Ludendorff and Hindenburg viewed this as a personal attack on their authority and filed a formal complaint with the Kaiser. However, the Kaiser resolutely supported Falkenhayn, who got his way.


what did the Kaiser keep supporting him? how Hinendberg acted here might be interesting. I suspect Ludendorff was a puppet and Hindenberg was an agent. Maybe Hindenberg would always take Ludendorff's side while trying to manipulate him.


	...Falkenhayn was not as close - minded as his rival Ludendorff, and he believed that Germany needed to pursue a new strategy to win the war.  He didn’t think Germany had the strength of numbers to dictate the peace that it had sought at the start of the war. Like Bethmann - Hollweg, he rationed that Germany needed to broker a separate peace with one of the countries to divide the Entente. 43 While he viewed Great Britain as the largest threat, he determined that France should once again be the target. He judged that France’s morale was weaker, and an offensive along the Meuse River could “bleed the French army white” and force France to sue for peace with Germany. This would in turn put Russia in a poor position without her main ally, and force her to sue for peace. Then Germany could focus on its most stalwart enemy, Great Britain.


what? his plan was to throw troops at France and somehow this would get Russia to sue for peace? and he judged French morale was "weaker" even while the Russian revolution and anti-war movement was going on.


	It is critical to note that at the commencement of the war the generals convinced themselves that the only way they could save the monarchy was through military victory and subsequent territorial annexations. 46 The Supreme Command regarded a victorious peace associated with large - scale annexations and financial reparations to be the only acceptable outcome of the war. The Supreme Command assumed that a negotiated peace, let alone a military defeat would destroy the status of the officer corps, the monarchy, and the whole fabric of society as well. 47 Ludendorff maintained t his belief throughout the war. He was worried a bout liberal political reform in the empire and he believed victory could assuage civilian unrest.


Ludnedorff a tyrant all on his own


	Conversely, Chancellor Bethmann - Hollweg adapted better to Germany’s present situation. Whereas Ludendorff championed total military victory, Bethmann - Hollweg pursued separate peace negotiations. While Ludendorff unrelentingly strove for outright annexations in the east and west without regard to the political ramifications, Bethmann - Hollweg favored more subtle measures, such as indirect economic ties and military conventions in those areas.


this "military vs diplomat" things going on might be worth understanding more.

It's strange that Ludendorff hated the Bolsheviks yet signed off on sending over Lenin. Did the Foreign Ministry need to create an environment where they could act independently of the military? How early did Ludendorff come to hate the Bolsheviks? Another good question is who specifically did he blame for "stabbing Germany in the back?"


	Which direction, east or west, was the correct front on which to focus? While the greater threat to Germany was the combined might of France and Great Britain in the west, these two were also less likely to break than Russia.


this makes Falkenhayn's plan even more strange--if their goal was to break up the entente, wouldn't it make sense to "break" the country "most likely to break" first? It would make sense to commit as many resources as possible to knock out Russia from the entente while playing defense on the Western front. Instead Falkenhayn threw hundreds of thousands of lives on the Western front that broke Germany's army.


	After the initial westward thrust by the Germans, only reinforcements from troops in the east might have provided enough manpower to break through.  This confusion might have been enough to isolate France, who would have been under immediate threat and thus forced to sue for peace. However, the resistance from Bethmann - Hollweg, Ludendorff and Hindenburg made this a daunting task. The trenches of the western front also reduced the chances of a successful breakthrough offensive.


presumably, Hollweg and Hindenburg kept just enough fighting on the Eastern front to facilitate the Bolshevik "revolution"


	The successful German Gorlice - Tornow Offensive of May 1915 was a major blow to Russian morale. The Russian Tsar, Nicholas II, declared himself front - line supreme commander to inspire the faltering troops. 49 Consequently, each subsequent Russian defeat was blamed on the Tsar and his government. Had Falkenhayn transferred the required battalions to the east at the Battle of Lodz, the Russian army would have been completely annihilated — much like the fate suffered by the German 6 th army against the Russians in a reverse situation at Stalingrad during World War II.


The Russian army was taking a beating in 1915, and the Tsar was in command, being blamed for defeats. But Falkenhayn didn't send enough troops to the Eastern front to completely beat them.

The battle of Lodz was important here, and another incident where Falkenhayn made some inexcusable decisions.


	A decisive defeat at the Battle of Lodz could have produced a political and social crisis significant enough to bring Russia to the negotiating table. With Russia out of the war in 1915, the Central Powers would not have resorted to the question of unrestricted submarine warfare because of the Allied economic blockade, denying the excuse for America to join the war, and allowing most of the eastern forces to bolster the west for a true knockout blow that the High Command desired.


Falkenhayn missed an opportunity to bring Russia to the negotiating table. What was his excuse, that he didn't know the "internal situation" in Russia? His decisions appear to be deliberately helping the war keep going.


	However, the inability of the German High Command to work together prevented a favorable outcome, and the struggle for dominance between Falkenhayn and Ludendorff soon reached a climax.


apparently it can be blamed on a fight among the German High Command


	Ludendorff and Hindenburg worked hard to replace Falkenhayn as Chief of the General Staff, but as long as Falkenhayn maintained the support of the Kaiser, he was nearly untouchable.


perks of being "friends of the Kaiser?" I can see what they mean when they say Germany's system of government was no good


	The chancellor did his best to shape German policy, but the decision was ultimately in the hands of Falkenhayn because he was supported by the Kaiser.


Falkenhayn the true power behind the throne? When was it that Ludendorff was said to have become the military dictator of Germany?


	A policy of attrition as a means to victory was thus put in place without regard to the political implications.


maybe one of the key decisions that prolonged the war. Was there a controversy around this?


	The Kaiser was unable to reconcile military and political demands and chose to side more with the military views of Falkenhayn, in part because he favored him, but also to curtail the growing popularity of Hindenburg, who had become a celebrity after the victory at Tannenberg in 1914.


Why didn't the Kaiser like Hindenburg? This doc speaks of a fight among the German High Command, maybe the Kaiser took sides? It's always easier to get people to make stupid decisions when they're in the middle of a political fight.


	In order to end the war using his new strategy of “bleeding the French white,” Falkenhayn chose the fortress of Verdun as the target for his next attack. Although this battle is traditionally remembered today as an atrocious meat grinder that amounted to little more than needless bloodshed, the battle was never intended to develop the way it did.


or was it??


	French offensives in the spring and fall of 1915 in the Champagne region using triple the number of men and three and a half times the number of artillery pieces were repulsed by the Germans with little need for reinforcements, who also inflicted heavy casualties on the French in the process.


if the Germans were so good at defending on the Western front, why did Falkenhayn decide to push there and not on the East?


	52 Falkenhayn sought to goad the French into another major attack while the Germans controlled a strong, defensive position so they could inflict a disproportionate number of casualties on the French. In order to accomplish this, Falkenhayn concluded that the Germans would have to at least threaten to take a strategic objective that the French High Command could not afford to lose.


I guess this is how he sold Verdun to the Kaiser. Might be worth seeing if there were any obvious flaws in his plan he should have known about. Was he trying to set up a bloody stalemate?


	Falkenhayn ul timately chose Verdun as his target for several reasons. First, it had significant sentimental value to the French. Second, it was a central point in the French line and its loss would severely weaken the French’s ability to maintain their front.  Third, Verdun was located in a salient which could be surrounded by the Germans on three sides and bombarded from above. Finally, the land behind the German front was well supported by rail lines and the German artillery could easily sever the French rail lines. 54 Thus, Verdun seemed an ideal target on which to focus.  To Falkenhayn, it didn’t matter whether the Germans could successfully capture the fortress. He simply wished to launch an assault on Verdun, gain favorable ground, dig in, and wait for the inevitable French and/or British counterattack. 


I'm not a general, but already this plan doesn't make sense... what if the British and French simply don't decide to counter-attack? idk I guess its like they dig in so they can deny Verdun from France? Would need to know more details. Either way, Falkenhayn said he didn't like Ludendorff's plan because it had too many "ifs". Might be worth comparing how crazy Falkenhayn's plan was vs. Ludendorff's.


	Falkenhayn kept a large force in reserve to thwart the eventual Allied counterattack, and believed that his heavy artillery could produce enough casualties to bring the French to the negotiating table. 55 However, miscommunication and disagreement between Falkenhayn and the commanders of the German 5th army undermined this unique plan for limited victory.


Falkanhayn's plan was undermined by "miscommunication" with his commanders--sounds familiar. I guess one difference between this and Marne is that Falkenhayn actually had a plan.


	The commanders of the 5 th army, who represented the brunt of the German assault believed that they should employ artillery on the three available sides surrounding Verdun. Artillery would be used to thoroughly bombard Verdun, and then the 5th army could take it. The attack order given to troops on January 27, 1916 urged the soldiers to fight much more aggressively than Falkenhayn intended. “The entire battle for the fortress of Verdun depends upon the attack never coming to a halt, thereby preventing the French f rom ever having the opportunity to construct new positions in their rear and reorganizing their shattered resistance.

	Falkenhayn did not want to risk such a complicated three - prong attack, and instead told the 5 th army to limit their attack on just th e east bank of the Meuse River; after - all, it didn’t matter if they took the fortress, they just needed to be in a desirable position and pr ovoke an Allied counterattack. 


Ok, I think I get it--Falkenhayn set up a plan where they don't need to storm Verdun, just "almost" take it and draw in an counter-attack into artillery. Instead, the 5th army decided to storm Verdun. Maybe Falkenhayn's fault is that he set up a plan that was easy to sabotage by "miscommunication"


	The  discord  between  Falkenhayn  and  the  5 th army  produced  disastrous consequences for the German forces. Although the initial wave of attacks against Verdun were successful in inflicting massive casualties on the French, Falkenhayn refused to deploy his reserve force to shatter the faltering French line. Crown Prince Wilhelm, the son of t he Kaiser, was one of the commanding generals of the 5 th army and after the battle he lamented that:

		On the evening of the 24 February, the resistance of the enemy was actually broken; the path to Verdun was open!... We were so close to a complete victory! However, I lacked the reserves for an immediate and ruthless exploitation of the success we had achieved.  The troops, who had been engaged in unbroken, heavy combat for 4 days, were no longer in the condition to do so. Thus, the psychological moment passed unused.

	Falkenhayn’s reluctance to commit his reserves on time allowed the Franco - British forces to reinforce the area. The Germans were halted well short of the line Falkenhayn wished to hold to conduct his offensive - defensive battle, and the French were content to bombard the Germans with their own artillery from the west bank of the Meuse.


because of "discord" between Falkenhayn and his 5th army, he decided not to send in the reserves when he had a shot at taking Verdun. As a result, his plan failed and the French started shelling them instead.


	The Battle of Verdun dragged on with mounting casualties, but the numbers were not lopsided enough to produce the political effect Falkenhayn hoped for. The initiative was finally called off on December 17, 1916.


why did he wait so long to call it off?


	Thus the battle was not only a tactical failure, but a strategic one as well, actually producing the opposite effect than was intended, bringing the French people together as a nation rather than breaking their morale to the point of suing for peace. 58 


Verdun brought France togehter instead of breaking their resolve. Maybe Falkenhayn should have seen this coming? Somehow, this all seems like a set-up for World War II.


	This battle served to discredit Falkenhayn, and was a political victory for Ludendorff and Hindenburg.



Falkenhayn's failure was a political victory for Ludendorff/Hindenburg. After Verdun, Falkenhayn was sacked. There are a lot of parallels between Marne and Verdun. In general, when someone with a job like that fails so spectacularly and gets sacked it makes sense that people would look to his/her rival to replace him. This is what happened when Falkenhayn replaced Moltke after Marne, and apparently it happened again after Verdun.

Did this pave the way for Ludendorff and his military dictatorship? And so paved the way for the Kapp Putsch, the Beer hall Putsch, the Nazis, and so on.


	The Battle of Verdun did not succeed mainly due to the miscommunication of Falkenhayn and the generals of the 5tharmy. The generals of the 5th army were certain that military victory could have been won outright had Falkenhayn committed his reserves when they were needed in the initial thrust. However, Falkenhayn proposed a new tactic to win the war through attrition. By December, while the Battle of Verdun was winding down, the German General Mackensen had succeeded in crushing much of the Romanian army in the Balkan Front of the war. Bethmann-Hollweg jumped at this new opportunity to begin peace negotiations while Germany was in a stronger position. Despite more objections from Ludendorff and Hindenburg, the Chancellor managed to convince the Kaiser that this was a prime opportunity to secure peace.


Did Holwegg genuinely want peace after Verdun? Or maybe this was just a way to convince the people who hated him to continue the war? hard to say without looking at details. But generally a good way to ruin a good idea is have a bad person champion it.

What about the Reichstag peace declaration? what was the timing of that in relation to this?

Reichstag peace resolution was passed on July 19 1917


	However, even though Ludendorff was unable to stop the talks, he did manage to alter the German note to the Allied Powers with his own aggressive rhetoric.The note read, “based on the consciousness of their military and economic strength, prepared to continue the struggle to the last man if need be, but simultaneously inspired by the desire of preventing  further bloodshed... the four allied governments are proposed to enter into peace negotiations immediately.”

	The Entente Powers swiftly rejected the peace note claiming it was a “maneuver of war.” 


Ludendorff for whatever reason decides to sabotage peace.

Was the attempt at peace something they wanted? If they can propose peace and have the entente reject it, it would be easier to sell the war to the rest of Germany (or at least the German right) for a little longer. Putting out a shitty peace deal would in general be an effective way to divide the Entente and Germany some more, since each would feel like they'd been snubbed by the other.


	The Entente clearly did not want the war to end if there was any prospect of German victory, no matter how limited that victory may be.


Although, the author implies rejecting the deal was mostly the Entente's fault. I can believe it. Would have to look into this more.


	Bethmann - Hollweg looked to American President Woodrow Wilson as a mediator for the two sides, but Wilson was moving closer and closer to the Pro - Entente camp. 60 Wilson had demanded that Germany give up all claims to a German controlled Belgium if peace was to be attained.  However, Ludendorff and Hindenburg simply refused to acquiesce to this demand. They were dead set on possessing Liège and Belgian railways, and on maintaining open access to occupying the country whenever Germany saw fit. 61 Bethmann - Hollweg’s failed bid for peace provided the opportunity for Ludendorff to bring up the notion of unrestricted submarine warfare as a new way to win the war, which ultimately became the great turning point.


Ludendorff continued to sabotage peace. I think this is saying there were two attempts at peace? not sure but either way it looks like Ludendorff sabotaged peace.

Ludendorff is credited with bringing-in unrestricted submarine warfare, but Falkenhayn called for this too. What about Hindenberg?

Ludendorff does come off as a complete idiot, another fall guy (like Moltke) and just a puppet for others.


	By August, 1916 Falkenhayn’s days were numbered. The disaster at Verdun proved to be a massive blow against his credibility, but the knockout punch came when Romania entered t he war against the Central Powers. Falkenhayn believed he could handle the situation in the Balkans, but this new war front located in the east proved to be enough for other genera ls to take action against him. Bethmann - Hollweg, Ludendorff, Hindenburg and Generals Lyncker and Plessen argued for a removal of Falkenhayn as Chief of the General Staff. The Kaiser agreed, and Falkenhayn was replaced by what became known as the Third Supreme Army Command (OHL) under the command of the poisonous duo, Ludendorff and Hindenburg.


Verdun weakened Falkenhayn politically, but the final blow was Romania entering the war in August 1916. He was replaced with Ludendorff and Hindenberg in the OHL.

Why did they wait until August to get rid of Falkenhayn?

a theme throughout all this is that the Kaiser was afraid of Ludendorff/Hindenberg and wanted to limit their power. And maybe he was right to worry, since Ludendorff was said to have become more powerful than the Kaiser when he took power. 

Presumaly, Ludendorff was easier to manipulate, so they would have preferred him in power over the Kaiser. But that leaves questions about the timing.

Did the failure at Verdun weaken the Kaiser politically and boost Ludendorff? The idea of using a war to bring down a monarch clearly wouldn't be new to them. The Tsar got blamed for the failures of the Russian army.

Possibly, they wanted Ludendorff to be popular, so they could have had a strat of using the war to make the kaiser more unpopular, then once he was unpopular enough replace him with Ludendorff. Ludendorff would be useful to them later.


	In the same month, Bethmann - Hollweg also attempted to broker peace negotiations separately with Russia. According to Ludendorff’s memoirs, the Kaiser had taken an earnest interest in the peace offer, and he notes that Wilhelm “ displayed clearly his high sense of responsibility to bring peace to the world at the earliest moment.” 63


another reason to replace the Kaiser with Ludendorff--the Kaiser, at least at certain moments, demonstrated a desire for peace, while Ludendorff did not. They might have seen shoving him out of the way with Ludendorff as a necessity for continuing the war.


	Russia demanded that Poland, and especially the capital city of Warsaw, be returned to them.  Not surprisingly , Ludendorff and the rest of the High Comm and flatly refused to entertain such ridiculous demands . Poland was theirs now. The German Governor - General of Warsaw, von Beseler believed that Poland’s manpower could be harnessed to bolster Germany’s numbers in the field. He proposed that Poland be declared independent with the stipulation of a minimum three regiment strong volunteer Polish army who would fight for the Central Powers. Ludendorff approved of this plan and although Bethmann - Hollweg did not think it would work, he did not actively resist it because he was largely unsupported and outnumbered by the military leaders.


Hollweg's favorite excuse


	However, once the plan was put in place, the military leaders were quickly disappointed. Most Poles believed that even if they fought for Germany they would receive neither compensation nor gratitude. Instead they chose to passively resist all German machinations. Instead of adding to Germany’s strength, Poland became another problem.

	Here is a case where a purely political matter where peace with Russia could have been possible. However, Ludendorff’s expansionist innuendos in the peace note to the rest of the Allied Powers sabotaged real efforts to end the war. Instead, the military sphere was allowed to encroach into a political affair over the chancellor of the political sphere. What is even more astonishing is the sheer lack of reflection by the military leaders. Ludendorff was fixated on winning the war, yet even through a purely military - oriented lens, Ludendorff failed to recognize that conceding a small piece of territory to Russia in exchange for peace would have eliminated a major front in the war and given him an opportunity to win through military means. Then, after the rest of the Allies were beaten or sued for peace, Germany could re - annex Poland with much less fear of reprisal.  Ludendorff’s narrow - sightedness is astonishing on multiple levels, and his ineptitude continued with the debate over unrestricted submarine warfare.


Ludendorff had a chance for peace with Russia but sabotaged that too. What was he thinking? I figure him for a useful idiot since they blame everything on him (and he seemed happy to act stupidly and take the blame), and some of his writings come off as something a conscious agent of influence wouldn't write, but his actions come off as inexcusable too.

One possibility is that he was really sold on the idea that annexing Poland was necessary for the war effort, and that the Bolshevik revolution would get them peace in the end. Was Ludendorff sold on the idea of supporting the Bolsheviks at this point? That is an important question. But it is true that if German policymakers in general saw the Bolsheviks as a project of theirs, they would be biased toward keeping that up. They could feel like they were invested in it.

It looks like Ludendorff did have hopes for the Bolsheviks:

https://archive.org/stream/Germany-and-Revolution-in-Russia-1915-1918/GermanyAndRevolutionInRussia1915-1918-DocumentsFromArchivesOfGermanForeignMinistry_djvu.txt
	Some of the men who took part in the formulation of German  war-time policy recorded their experiences. But the memoirs of  I.udendorff, Kuhlmann, Hoffmann, or Erzberger 1 do not en-  lighten the reader much as to the official attitude towards the  revolution in Russia. They may have been unaware of the  consistency of the policy as Bergen conducted it; they may  have regarded it as an incident which should remain hidden in  the government archives, or they may have just forgotten. Kiihl-  mann certainly knew about it but chose to be uninformative  in his memoirs. Ludendorff, when referring to Lenin's journey  across Germany, did so with 'bated breath'. 


later:

	...In the second telegram, No. 1493 of 6 October  (AS 3761), Ludendorff acknowledges the undermining activities in Russia of the  Foreign Ministry and of the Political Section of the Deputy General Staff, expresses  thanks for the allocation of large amounts of money for it, and stresses the value  of this work, especially in Finland.


sounds like he bought-in to it


back to "path to ruin:"

	After the failure of the Schlieffen Plan at the beginning of the war, Grand Admiral Alfred von Tirpitz pressed for a “wonder weapon” to defeat the Allied Powers quickly and efficiently. From the beginning of the war the British had used the Royal Navy to apply an economic blockade of Germany. Tirpitz believed that using unrestricted submarine warfare, (using submarines to attack enemy merchant vessels while warning neutral merchant craft to not tread into the designated warzone) would serve as a strong counter to the blockade. 65 Tirpitz also believed that unrestricted submarine warfare would inflict so much damage on the British shipping industry that they would be forced to surrender within a few months. 66 The Grand Admiral was supported by Falkenhayn as well as Ludendorff who had this to say on the matter:

		The Field Marshall (Hindenburg) and myself, in our view of the whole situation and in our too correct doubt as to the success of the peace proposals, had already had under consideration, as part of our military problems, the possibility of carrying on the submarine campaign in an intensified form Unrestricted submarine warfare was now the only means left to secure in any reasonable time a victorious end to the war... Our honor, our existence, our free economic development, must come unimpaired out of this terrible struggle... In the face of the enemy’s will to (our) annihilation, (this is) a call to fight to the last.

	Bethmann - Hollweg and as well as the Kaiser were acutely aware of the political repercussions of using an outlawed method of warfare. They correctly argued that if the Germans resorted to this tactic, America would join the war against them, thereby erasing any chance for Germany to win. 68 Tirpitz and Falkenhayn countered that the U - boat campaign would be so successful that Britain would be out of the war long before America would be able to increase its strength to meaningful numbers.


Falkenhayn argued for unrestricted submarine warfare along with Tripitz (against Hollweg and the Kaiser). Falkenhayn doesn't come off as a dumbass like Ludendorff. He is another person who started the war then helped Germany lose it in various ways.

Apparently, he eventually "won over" Hollweg for unrestricted submarine warfare.

At first, Falkenhayn was against unrestricted submarine warfare in 1915 (coninciding with the sinking of the Lucetania). But after talking to Trippitz in 1916, he "changed his mind." He said it was critical to his Verdun strategy, so this might have been while he still had the Kaiser's favor (did he lose favor after Verdun? it sounds like it).

Hollweg had a "debate" with Ludendorff about it, and the Kaiser decided on unrestricted submarine warfare.


	...In this critical moment the Kaiser changed his mind and supported the OHL and their request for u nrestricted submarine warfare. Although Bethmann - Hollweg still opposed the measure, the Kaiser maintained that this was a purely military matter that did not concern the Chancellor. 73 Thus, Germany resumed unrestricted submarine warfare, and two months later, the United States entered the war. 


Is there a hint of resentment by the Kaiser against Hollweg tainting his decision? might be worth looking into more. If it's up to the Kaiser, everything they would do to get unrestricted submarine warfare would ammount to trying to change this one man's mind.

After America entered the war, Ludendorff would have a tougher time with his plans for crushing Russia. In the end, he would have to commit more forces to he Western front anyway, just like Falkenhayn did.


	Although Bethmann - Hollweg was initially content with Falkenhayn’s dismissal, he soon came to regret the role he played in the former Chief of the General Staff’s demise. The Third OHL consisting of Ludendorff and Hindenburg now had control over the military, and they slowly reduced the Kaiser’s influence from 1917 - 1918. The duo also worked very hard to remove Bethmann - Hollweg and replace him with a conservative puppet chancellor who supported their ideals. The Kaiser still looked favorably at Bethmann - Hollweg but against the relentless attacks from the OHL, his days were numbered. David Craig argues that Bethmann - Hollweg might have saved his position as chancellor after losing the battle over submarine warfare had he acquiesced wholeheartedly to the designs of the OHL. However, he stuck to his beliefs.

	Up until this point, the civilian population had continually dem anded political reform from the government. Bethmann - Hollweg now sought to fulfill the people’s desires and regain some support for himself. Bethmann - Hollweg convinced the Kaiser that political reform would get the civilians back on his side and increase the Kaiser’s popularity, of which the Kaiser was always conscious. The Kaiser delivered his “Easter Message” to the people on April 7, 1917 , promising political reform at the conclusion of the war. This move prompted a backlash from the Conservatives under Ludendorff.

	On April 23, 1917 the OHL prompted the Kaiser to call a meeting to reevaluate Germany’s war aims. Bethmann - Hollweg was invited by the Kaiser who had been once again making efforts t o obtain a separate peace with Russia after the February Revolution forced the abdication of the Tsar and the creatio n of a provisional government. This meeting, known as the Kreuznach Conference, served as the first real instance in which the Kaiser lost faith in the Chancellor.  Bethmann - Hollweg argued that excessive demands would upset this delicate balance and force Russia to fight on. However, the OHL was fixated on expansionist aims including the annexation of Courland, Lithuania, and the maintenance of control of Poland, even though Germany was not in a strong position to demand them.

	The Kaiser’s Easter Message was an embarrassment for him due to the negative reaction from the Conservatives. He attempted to rectify this mistake by taking the OHL’ s side during the Kreuznach Conference. Thus, once again peace efforts were thwarted because of the expansionis demands of the OHL. However, because peace negotiations were in the political sphere, Bethmann - Hollweg, not Ludendorff and Hindenburg was the one who was blamed for the failure.  This would not be the last time that the failures of the OHL were placed at the Chancellor’s feet.


Hollweg taking the blame? I wonder if he was trying to help the Bolsheviks or if he was just a puppet. He does a lot of inexcusable things and seems smarter than Ludendorff. It's hard to say.


	By June 19 the U-boat wonder weapon had lost its luster. While the tonnage of ships sunk were initially well above the navy’s projections, the Allied Powers soon adopted a transatlantic convoy system that limited the number of ships sunk and allowed them to inflict some damage of their own. Amazingly, the OHL blamed the failed U-boat initiative on Bethmann-Hollweg, claiming that the only reason the Allies continued fighting was because they were counting on an internal collapse of Germany stemming from his statements about political unrest in the country.76Ludendorff and Hindenburg then continued their crusade by turning members of the Reichstag against Bethmann-Hollweg by arguing that Bethmann-Hollweg’s position in office jeopardized Germany’s chance for victory.Confident that Bethmann-Hollweg’s support was sufficiently eroded, the duo played their trump card. On the July 12, they telephoned the Kaiser and submitted their resignations, saying they could no longer cooperate with the Chancellor. This childish form of blackmail placed the Kaiser in a hopeless position. The war effort could not afford to loseits two most popular generals.To save His Majesty from embarrassment, Theobald von Bethmann-Hollweg resigned as chancellor.


this might be worth understanding more. It seems like Hollweg helped set this up.


	...After Ludendorff’s last ditch Spring Offensive concluded in failure on 18 July 1918, the German troops were at their breaking po int and to desperat e for peace. They believed that if the Kaiser was removed, then the Allied Powers were more likely to accept a swift peace and bring four years of bloodshed to an end. The OHL was also at its breaking point, but Lud endorff continued to vacillate. After tel ling the Kaiser the war could not be won and Germany should conclude an armistice with the Allies, he reneged on his words and soon avowed that Germany should continue the war and that the civilian leaders who wished for peace were ‘pessimists.’ 80 At this point, Ludendorff completely lost the confidence of the Conservatives because of his repeated failures a nd capricious demeanor. A coup to remove Ludendorff was devised , and when Ludendorff found out he convinced Hindenburg to submit his resignation alon g with his own, in an attempt to gain lever age over the Kaiser once again. However, with Ludendorff finally politically weakened, the Kaiser regained temporary fortitude. He accepted Ludendorff’s removal but rejected Hindenburg’s and demanded that he stay , a request to which Hindenburg acquiesced. 81 However, this act proved to be too little, too late. 


In the end Ludendorff gets ruined but Hindenburg comes out clean. I guess Ludendorff only kept a clique following? From the story of the Kapp Putsch it sounds like he still had some political sway with some.


	The removal of Ludendorff did not improve conditions for the Kaiser and the government.   Despite  repeated  advice  urging  the  Kaiser  to  abdicate  in  favor  of  o ne  of  his  sons  to  give  the  monarchy a better chance at survival, Wilhelm stubbornly believed he could stay in power, saying ,  “I will not abdicate.  It would be incompatible with my duties, as successor to Frederick the Great,  towards God, the people  and my conscious... My abdication would be the beginning of the end  for all German monarchies... But above all my duty as Supreme Warlord forbids me to abandon  the army now.”

	Unfortunately for him, the army did not share the same sentiments towards their Empe ror.  In the wake of the German Revolution, Wilhelm II fled to Holland in exile where he lived out the remainder of his life in the hope of someday returning to power. Even after Adolf Hitler took control of Germany, the Kaiser still strangely believe d tha t H itler would give up his position and reinstate Wilhelm as Kaiser. 

	By the conclusion of World War I Wilhelm, Bethmann - Hollweg, Falkenhayn, and Ludendorff had all lost t heir power. Chief of the General Staff Erich von Falkenhayn and Chancellor  Theobald  v on  Bethmann - Hollweg  were  ousted  by  the  machinations  of  Erich Ludendorff, who was in turn removed by the Kaiser. Although not defeated in battle, the German army and people were tired of the war, and in their eagerness for peace, they forced the Kaiser from power as well. These four men vied for power and tried to pull Germany in their own desired directions. But, because of the inflexibility of Ludendorff and the Kaiser, the delusion of Ludendorff, Falkenhayn, and the Kaiser, and the discord between them all — Germany not only lost its chance to win the war, it lost multiple chances for a favorable peace as well.  Had the civilian and military branches worked better together, and the man constitutionally in charge of them been stronger and more self - reflective, Germany’s fortunes might have been very different. 



------

http://www.historynet.com/hindenburg-and-ludendorff.htm
	Moltke, however, was blamed for the failure in the West and was replaced by Lieutenant General Erich von Falkenhayn as chief of the German Great General Staff on September 15.

	The following day, Falkenhayn announced the creation of the new German 9th Army (composed mostly of 8th Army units) under Hindenburg as commander, with Ludendorff continuing as his chief of staff.


Falkenhayn giving Hindenburg a promotion?
