https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/1917_French_Army_mutinies
	The French Army mutinies of 1917 took place amongst the French troops on the Western Front in Northern France during World War I. They started just after the disastrous Second Battle of the Aisne, the main action in the Nivelle Offensive in April 1917. General Robert Nivelle had promised a decisive war-ending victory over the Germans in 48 hours; the men were euphoric on entering the battle. The shock of failure soured their mood overnight. The mutinies and associated disruptions involved, to various degrees, nearly half of the French infantry divisions stationed on the western front. The new commander, General Philippe Pétain, restored morale by talking to the men, promising no more suicidal attacks, providing rest for exhausted units, home furloughs, and moderate discipline. He held 3,400 courts martial; 554 mutineers were sentenced to death but over 90% had their sentences reprieved.

	While the immediate cause was the extreme optimism and subsequent disappointment at the Nivelle offensive in the spring of 1917, other causes were pacificism (stimulated by the Russian Revolution and the trade-union movement) and disappointment at the non-arrival of American troops whom French soldiers on the front had unrealistically been expecting to arrive within days of the U.S. declaration of war.[1] The mutinies were kept secret from the Germans and their full extent was not revealed until decades later. The Germans' inability to detect the mutinies has been described as one of the most serious and most consequential intelligence failures of the war.


more weird inexplicable shit going on in World War I involving socialist revolutions, this time in France


------


http://www.jstor.org/stable/24436670?seq=1#page_scan_tab_contents


maybe this is a good article on it?



------


https://www.reddit.com/r/AskHistorians/comments/350akm/how_serious_were_the_mutinies_and_morale_problem/
	...Few of the soldiers wanted an 'end to the war', and fears of socialist revolution were exaggeration


Is this true? assuming socialists operating in France, the mutiniees seeme like they would have been a way for them to try exactly that


------


http://www.jstor.org/stable/24436670?seq=1#page_scan_tab_contents


article "The French Army Mutinies of 1917"


pg 24


says there is not that much written about it, an important event but many writers gloss over it.


pg 25

the mutinees came during a sense of horror at the losses of the war and a feeling that the war was pointless. Verdun an example of great losses that changed nothing.

People wanted to try something new and find a quick way to end the war.


	...Another, and immediately important, effect was the search for a magical formula that would produce a quick victory. There was to be no more of the *grignotage*, "nibbling" as the prudent tactic of Joffre was called.


Nivelle's plan was one of these "quick fixes." Called for concentrated attack on one area to break through German line.

pg 26

Germans withdrew to "long prepared positions" of Siegfried Line, which Nivville's plans didn't account for, but he went ahead anyway.

Niville asked Minister of war to look into anti-war propaganda and activities targetting soldiers

Niville had a tough time finding support for his plan in the new Ribot administration, so he looked to British politicians for support


pg 27

the element of surprise was "critical in Nivell's plan," but the date was delayed multiple times due to weather while the Germans captured the almost complete set of plans on April 6 and had time to prepare.


The plan failed. The soldiers had high expecations and were lied to by their superiors:

	...Despondency developed as a reaction to the high expectation that had prevailed before the attack. Testimony given before a secret committee of the Chamber showed that whether or not Nivelle had succeeded in infecting the French government with his enthusiasm, he had certainly transmitted his optimism to the lower ranks of the French army.7 A report from the Third Army read before the committee on June 28 is an example of the methods used to raise morale: "We were in a gay temper before the retreat of the Boches because the Americans were going to march with us. Perhaps the war was coming to an end.


pg 28


The soldiers were determined to end the war soon. Something made the soldiers hopeful the attack would work, and even the pessimistic ones showed optimism:


	According to the Postal Control the soldiers were careful to express optimism to their families during the first ten days of the attack. This attitude appeared to be universal, found even among men with whom it was not habitual. By the end of April all had changed. Now there was a pronounced discouragement and an extreme lassitude. From one of the most active sectors the Control made the ominous report: "One idea appears more and more: the war must be ended this year in one fashion or another."



the optimism was rapidly replaced with despondence. More than anything, the soldiers blamed "poor generalship" and some even accused some French commanders of being traitors:


	French intelligence was receiving the same report from other sources. There was at first a great enthusiasm, even among the wounded, which was rapidly displaced by black discouragement. There were complaints of poor artillery direction that had resulted in many French casualties and of the bad weather. Above all there was talk about the poor generalship, even to the point of questioning the loyalty of some French commanders. Nothing more could be done, the men felt. Their feelings were summed up in the sentence reported by the Deuxième Bureau to the Chamber, "The only thing left to do is to make peace."

	Despite the ugly portents of the last weeks of April the month passed without incident. Then on May 3 the Second Colonial Infantry refused to move into the line. There were shouts of "Down with the war" and "Death to traitors."


pg 29


A second outbreak of mutiny occured on May 20 where some soldiers refused to move into line while shouting pacifist slogans and singing "The International."


Mutiny spread rapidly toward the end of may. The soldiers were bitter not so much at officers but at the war, high pay of civilian workers, and stupidity of higher civil and military admin.

	...Although it may have been superficial, the influence of the Russian revolution on the mutineers was unmistakable. Notable in this connection, and perhaps the best known incident of the mutinies, is the revolt of the Russian brigades. Three Russian brigades had arrived in France early in 1916 for service on the French front. They were already infected by the revolutionary propaganda that was rife in the Czar's army. After the March revolution they had formed soviets and demanded to vote on their participation in the April 16 offensive. They had voted overwhelmingly to fight, and according to Painlevé, who was in a position to know, they conducted themselves gallantly before Brimont. Painlevé suggests it was the First Russian Brigade that sowed the seeds of the mutinies. The date of their first act of insubordination is not clear, although it would appear to have been around the middle of May.18 By June they had been transferred to an isolation camp at Courtine near Limoges. Here on June 9 the soldiers' council of the First Regiment published a manifesto that ranks as the most revealing document of the period of the mutinies:

		Since our arrival in France a year and a half ago, the rumor has been current that we had been sold for munitions. These rumors have multiplied more and more; in short they consider the Russian soldier not as a man but as a thing.

	Terrail reports that during the next three days a loyal Russian brigade fired 500 rounds of artillery into the camp. After eight men were killed and twenty-eight wounded, the rest submitted to discipline. Churchill repeats this statement, which would appear to be the origin of the many stories of the bombardment of mutineers that were circulated after the event. On the other hand, Major General Sir Edward Spears has informed the writers that there was no shelling of mutinous troops, although he agrees that the Russians bear much responsibility for inciting the revolts.


The Russian revolution had an unmistakable influence on the French mutineers. The Russian brigades in France had already been "propagandized" by Russian revolutionaries and formed soviets among the French armies. A Russian brigade "sewed the seeds" of mutiny with the rest of the army.

A mutinous Russian brigade was transferred to an isolation camp where they published a manifesto saying they are treated like cannon fodder. Then a loyal Russian brigade fired 500 rounds of artillery into the camp with 36 casualties. Churchill spoke of this, which appears to be origin of rumors of shelling of mutinous troops, although Gen Edward Spears said this never happened, but agrees Russians bear much responsibility for inciting the revolts.


pg 31


the researchers for the article thought there was a lot of propaganda and loosness with facts around this event, particularly regarding its causes. They found two stories of the origin of the mutinees: the army started it vs. members of the government started it. Each group blames the other.

Army says government didn't keep good morale and discipline at home and that defeatism and pacifism was spread to the soldiers. The government says the army made serious military blunders, mistreated soldiers and was generally incompetent.

authors found a lot of bullshit and sensationalism around General Petain's handling of the affair. "detailed accounts" say mutineers were shelled, while some army defenders deny soldiers were executed.

authors found that both sides of amry vs gov debate have some truth (apparently, the fight made it hard to tell who was lying and who was telling the truth).


pg 32


"large numbers" of Frenchmen responded warmly to socialist pacifism and even German inspired defeatist propaganda.

A report from Nivelle to the government on February 28 shows "the work of agents in the pay of the enemy" described in detail with the names of important culprits. General Mangin says this resulted in Nivell's channels of information being closed.

(one possiblity: Nivelle a good guy and actually wanted to win the war? Wise to subversive activities targetting the army? The failed offensive could have been a way to take him down. What happened to Nivelle after the offensive? Even if this were true, Nivelle still seems unusually stubborn and incompetent. And French soldiers believed their leadership were traitors. What made them believe that? Who specifically did they accuse?)

General Petain was severely critical of Nivell in a top secret report to the Minister of War, which was mostly about conditions "behind the lines." The report called out trade unions for promoting pacifism and he wanted to prosecute some people for passing "compromise peace" (is this separate peace?) tracts to soldiers.

The authors make it sound like general Petains complaints were a bit silly. Is this true? were they?


	...He had seen tracts calling for a compromise peace handed out in the in the Gare de l'Est to soldiers on leave. This behavior was criminal, the general argued. The perpetrators should be hunted down and hauled before military tribunals.

	The new commander-in-chief heaped his bitterest denunciations upon the French press. By applauding the measures taken by the revolutionary armies of Russia, the press, he felt, was deliberately trying to ruin the discipline of the army.


based on what we know now, they almost certainly trying to do exactly that


	Although the press had a duty to help maintain the morale of the country, it appeared to have no interest in the welfare of French arms:

		The articles show little enthusiasm for those things which are vital to our success. By way of compensation--at least as regrettable--the press never tires of dithyrambic eulogies on the exploits of our British allies. The English, one reads, have a perfect method of war, a superior artillery, a marvelous infantry.

	One wonders if the bitter sarcasm shown here is not the key to the military attitude toward the mutinies. More than a danger to France, they were a humiliation to the army. For this humiliation the army had to find a scapegoat. The mutinies did not show that the army was failing the nation but rather that the nation was not giving proper support to the army.


"the nation was not giving proper support to the army" seems like a weird way to put it. If you've read Denikin you can guess right away what Petain might have been talking about--e.g. Bolshevik propaganda convincing soldiers not to fight or disobey orders or messing with their heads leading them to fight poorly, hate officers. Of course any general would be upset with that. Did the authors not read Denikin?


	Perhaps the parallel to this on a far larger, more tragic scale came in 1940, when the same general, aged and honored, delivered France into the hands of the Germans as a gesture of "national expiation," thus saving the French army from surrender.


Do the authors have a grudge against Petain? it seems weird to be a historian, identify a historical fight than take sides without really backing your side up

pg 33-34

authors putting words in Petain's mouth? dunno whole context but that passage doesn't say what authors claim Petain says

pg 34

Petain listed the government, contact with Russian brigades, *agents provacateurs* who slipped into billets, the likelihood of escaping from acts of indiscipline with slight punishment because men attending pacifist meetings behind the lines were let off by a benevolent government, the restrictions placed on courts-martial, and the growth of drunkenness in the army as the cause of the mutinies.

	...Running through the arguments of nearly all of the supporters of the army point of view is the complaint, expressed more or less vigorously, that some members of the government were positively encouraging the mutineers. The man most frequently accused of complicity in these affairs was Malvy, Minister of the Interior in the Ribot and several previous governments. Around Malvy and his political sponsor, Joseph Gaillaux, the life and death political struggles of the Third Republic appear at their worst.


Most in the army blamed Malvy and Gaillaux for encouraging the mutineers


	The most damming evidence against the Minister of the Interior, viewed in historical perspective, is Nivelle's letter of February 28, already cited, in which the general asked Minister of War Lyautey to intervene with Malvy to take action against the disseminators of pacifist and defeatist propaganda, who were undermining the morale of the army. He did not say, as Mangin tried to imply before the letter became public, that the police under Malvy were actually protecting the propagandists, but the general did make it clear that he had received no co-operation from the Ministry of the Interior on what he regarded as a critical matter.


Nivelle asked Malvy to help out with the Bolshevik propagandists but Malvy didn't do anything. Also, did the police under Malvy protect propagandists? Mangin says so but Nivelle never said it.

Painleve says Nivelle's letter was not in the Minister of War files when he goth there and that Nivelle withdrew the letter immediately after sending it.

Nivelle named some traitors in his letter. The names were taken from "Carnet B," which was a guide for arrest of known traitors written by Surete


pg 35

Daudet, a right-wing columnist, attacked Malvy and said he was a traitor for Germany.

Duadet said Malvy used his control of the police to allow socialists to meet and spread propaganda (wouldn't using police to crack down on socialists potentially be a bad idea?)


pg 36

Duadet had an associate and maybe ally in Georges Clemenceau

(Clemenceau closely involved in Versailles treaty, attacked Ernst Judet, presented Germany with ultimatum to accept Versailles)

Malvy and Caillaux were arrested. Caillue was convicted of "corresponding with the enemy."  Several staff of the Bonnet Rouge were killed by firing squad.

The High Court investigated the mutinees and found they were caused by subversion. The arrests (if I'm reading right) were related to this subversion. Most historians accept the findings of the High Court.


	...So far as they have dealt with the mutinies, historians have usually accepted the findings of the High Court, taking it for granted that the unrest of 1917 was the result of organized subversion. It is surprising that subsequent events in France involving forces of the right have not led to a reassessment of this judgement. In reviewing the causes of the mutinies, it would seem important to recall that the uprisings occured immediately after a large offensive, which had been advertised as the final stroke of the war but which ended as a bloody fiasco. Yet, some of the army apologists, for example Mangin, argue that it was the cessation of the offensive and the removal of Nivelle that caused the mutinies and that an immediate renewal of the attack would have restored morale.


authors seem to side against "army's story" and don't think subversion caused the mutinees. Mangin's argument, if the telling here is correct, seems off as well. An mutiny motivated by anti-war sentiment probably wouldn't have been helped by a new offensive, especially with morale low (e.g. Kerensky offensive)


pg 37

authors and General spears say a spring 1917 strike may have helped the mutinees.


	...there is agreement among moderate observers that the many reports of vast distributions of revolutionary literature are false. "It never happened," says Painleve flatly


did it?

	
	...He admits that some tracts were found in the factories and shops of the great centers and that some made their way to the trenches through soldiers on leave, but there was nothing resembling the reported 600,000 defeatist brochures of the Federation de Meteaux. It has been suggested that the stories of defeatist literature were the work of overzealous security agents who passed along reports which they may have surmised that their commanders in the French headquarters were anxious to hear.


should see if there was lots of propaganda passed to the French soldiers before the mutiny. It happend in Russia, so the same happening in France isn't much of a stretch.

authors sound more like propagandists than historians


	...Before passing to a discussion of the suppression of the mutinies, there ought to be some review of two great external events that undeniably played a part in the state of the morale of the French army. The earlier of these, the first Russian revolution, was clearly in the minds of many French soldiers during the uprisings. The socialist slogans that were shouted, the demands that the government issue passports to the Stockholm peace convention, and the general agreement on the pernicious example of the Russian brigades make clear the importance of foreign socialist influence. This is not to say that these sentiments were deliberately promoted by the government. There was perhaps less energy in the proseuction of agitators than the army wished, notably in the case of Merrheim, the secretary of the Senidcat des Metallurgistes, but the objectional conditions had existed for three years during which there had been no mutinies. One is drawn to the obvious conclusion that the cheif cause of discontent was the failure of the April 16 attack and the appalling prospect of another winter in the trenches. Socialism lent a tone that the mutinies would not otherwise have had, but it was not an important cause.


Mutineers shouted socialist slogans and demands to attend Stockholmf converence. The government had less energy than the amry wished in rposecuting some agitators, like Merrheim. The authors say socialism set the tone of the mutinies but "was not an important cause."


authors say soldiers being lied to about Americans marching with them for the offensive led to high expectations and a plunge in morale after the failed offensive.

there are a variety of stories on the supression of the mutinees. Some say soldiers were executed at random and shelling of troops. Petain was responsible for curbing mutiniees.


pg 40

Petain used harsh measures to punish mutineers, such as "punishment units" that were given "hard and dangerous assignments" (what were they?) "It is difficult to answer the question of how many executions there really were."


	The historian may make three conclusions about the French army mutinies of 1917. First, despite charges and recrimations, it is clear that the underlying cause of the mutinies was French war weariness-a weariness that approached exhastion when defeat exploded the high hopes that accompanied Nivell's win-the-war-offensive. THat the mutinies followed a disastrous and useless attack has often been forgotten by the polemical writers of the past forty years. Secondly, the extravegant rumors, such as the report of the use of artillery against mutinous troops must be discounted-if not discarded. These tales of military murder have obscured the real nature of the tragic and massive event. Finally, the mutinies might easily have caused a French military surrender. Had the Germans recognized the real significanse of the reports of dissafection that filtered across their lines in the spring of 1917, they might have won the war in a few weeks.


------


https://www.britannica.com/biography/Louis-Jean-Malvy

Malvy was tried for treason during the war


	...on July 22, 1917, Premier Georges Clemenceau charged Malvy with lax administration in dealing with defeatists and pacifists. Malvy resigned on August 31, and the Ribot cabinet fell. In October the royalist Léon Daudet accused Malvy of high treason. At Malvy’s request, he was tried on both charges by the Senate, sitting as a high court; on Aug. 6, 1918, he was acquitted of the charge of high treason but was found guilty of forfaiture (culpable negligence in the performance of his duties) and sentenced to banishment for five years. He spent his exile in Spain.

	Pardoned and returned to the Chamber of Deputies in 1924, Malvy remained active in politics until his retirement in 1940.


Clemenceau charged with lax administration in dealing with "pacifists and defeatist," Duadet charged him with high treason. Malvy was banished for five years then returned to politics.


https://translate.google.com/translate?hl=en&sl=fr&u=https://fr.wikipedia.org/wiki/Louis_Malvy&prev=search

in some radical socialist party

had affair with actress Helene Berry


	...Louis-Jean Malvy is Minister of the Interior during the First World War . He decided not to apply the B notebook in order to prevent a possible workers' reaction to the war and to daringly allow the rallying of the workers to the Sacred Union .


Malvy, if reading right, decided not to go through with arrests of traitors named in Carnet B. His stated reason was that this could have led to unrest with workers.

The extreme right levvied attacks on Malvy, such as accusing him of wanting to destablize France and for the failure of the battle of the Chemin des Dames and of having relations with Mata-Hari. Daudet sent a letter to Poincare accusing Malvy of giving intel to Germany and fomenting 1917 mutinees.


	... After a dozen hearings, he was sentenced on August 6, 1918, the High Court changing the charge at the last moment. 


interesting--how did they change it?


------


http://archive.spectator.co.uk/article/10th-august-1918/3/the-trial-of-m-malvy-before-the-french-benate-sitt
	as a High Court ended on Tuesday. M. Malvy, who was Minister of the In- terior during the first three years of the war, was acquitted on the charges of treason brought against 'him by M. Leon Daudet. The Senate then declared its right to raise new charges of negligence in administration against M. Malvy. This remarkable claim was affirmed on a division by 102 votes to 78. The new charges were, in effect, that M. Malvy had not tried to suppress the Anarchist and pro-German intrigues in which such men as Duval and Bolo were engaged, and had hindered the efforts of the police and the mili- tary authorities to unveil the plots. The Senate found M. Malvy guilty of these charges, and sentenced him to five years' banish- ment, without the loss of his civic rights. There has been no such trial of an ex-Minister in recent French history. .General Boulanger. who was condemned in his absence in 1889, and M. Deroulede, who was exiled by the Senate in 1900, were tried for plotting against the Republic. For a similar case in Great Britain we must go back to 1806, when Lord Melville was tried and acquitted by the House of Lords on a charge of corruption.


court found that Malvy did not try to supress "anarchist and pro-German intrigues". Names Duval and Bolo as intriguers. Says Malvy hindered police and military efforts to unveil plots.


------


http://www.nytimes.com/2007/04/15/world/europe/15iht-mutiny.4.5296462.html
	by Rick Smith

	...In April 1917, all the basic ingredients for mutiny were present: three years of mud, rats, and lice in the trenches; mild spring weather; political revolt in Europe; and a classic tale of hubris.

	Nivelle, a hero of Verdun the previous year, wanted a quick breakthrough, and he did not relent, even when nearly all signs pointed to defeat.


Smith says (if I read right) Nivell's "hubris" was part of what led to the mutiny


	Meantime, revolution was in the air in 1917. The czar had abdicated a month earlier, and units of allied Russian soldiers scattered through the Chemin des Dames were restive, singing "The Internationale." Labor movements were also afoot in Paris, something hardly lost on soldiers rotating on home leave.

	But these factors were true for other sectors of the 450-kilometer front. So what set off the mutiny?

	"It was simply the massive disappointment of the troops," said Guy Marival, the organizer of the commemoration this year. "You have to consider their expectations. They had been told this would be the final offensive for victory and peace, and it became quickly clear that this was not the case."


Smith agrees with Gilbert and Bernard that it was the "dissapointment of the troops" that led to the mutiny

should look into rick smith later


	...But three roadside placards near Craonne, sponsored by the local authorities and the European Union, tell a story of men driven to exhaustion and quote the "Song of Craonne," a ballad whose lyricist remains anonymous: "Now it's your turn, all you big shots, to climb the ridge, because if it's war you want, pay for it with your own skin."


------


https://wwi.lib.byu.edu/index.php/Malvy
	At the outbreak of war Malvy resisted calls for the round-up of so-called subversives unionists, pacifists and other 'undesirables' whose names were listed in the Carnet B. He became involved in subsidising newspapers and came under intense criticism when it was learned that the Bonnet Rouge (one of the papers supported by Malvy) had been receiving German money to spread pacifist propaganda.


Is this what that telegram in the Foreign Ministry archives was talking about?

Malvy resisted calls to arrest subversives and supported a newspaper, Bonnet Rouge, that was also receiving money from Germany to spread "pacifist" propaganda.


	When the paper's administrator, Duval, was arrested with a cheque on his person from a German banker, Clemenceau accused Malvy during a secret session of the Senate in July 1917 of 'betraying the interests of France'. When the paper's director was also arrested as a result of the subsequent investigation (which revealed the sale of the paper to a shadowy intermediary, Bolo Pacha), the paper was closed and its director died in prison.


Bonnet Rouge administrator Duval arrested with German cheque on him (is this why they say it was funded by Germany?). An investigation also led to arrest of director, revealed paper sold to shady guy Bolo Pacha.


	Added to the civilian unrest of 1917 and the French Army mutinies, the discovery of French military documents in the Bonnet Rouge's offices meant the end for Malvy. 


French military documents were found in the Bonnet Rouge's offices and this was tied to Malvy

	As Minister of the Interior, he was blamed for not suppressing defeatist and pacifist agitators and publications with sufficient energy and he was forced to resign on 31 August 1917. In October he was charged with treason and tried by a special commission of the Senate the following year. Although acquitted of treason, he was found guilty of culpable negligence in the performance of his duties and banished for five years. His former directeur du cabinet was imprisoned, however, and Bolo and Duval received death sentences.

	Despite this close association with men found guilty of serious crimes, he returned to the Chamber of Deputies after the war and again became Minister of the Interior, briefly, in 1926. 


Malvy was closely associated with traitors Bolo and Duval, who were sentenced to death, yet became Minister of Interior again in 1926


------


https://books.google.com/books?id=tnsxAQAAMAAJ&pg=PA267&lpg=PA267&dq=%22Bonnet+Rouge%22+Malvy&source=bl&ots=WpvNp3z1Tw&sig=Q0i4nq3LsOYK-sjKMiZuJbB8BJ4&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwjB4Jjv3cTXAhVE7CYKHT0eCnAQ6AEIUjAM#v=onepage&q=%22Bonnet%20Rouge%22%20Malvy&f=false

	The immediate occasion of the ministry's fall was as follows: On November 13, the question of the government's course in dealing with the cases of disloyalty and treason was debated and an interpellation on that subject was moved. M. Painleve finally demanded that the interpellations be put off till November 30. This question was voted upon and the government lost by 186 to 277.


French government wanted to deal with treason problem, Painleve wanted to put off till later


	The Scandals.  The press abounded in direct charges or insinuations against persons of more or less prominence on the ground of disloyalty or treason. As the year advanced many arrests were made and portions of the evidence against the accused, together with their statements on their own behalf, were made public, but no decision had been reached in any important case at the close of the year.


Press had many charges of treason. There were many arrests, but no decisions on important cases for awhile.


	The most notorious affairs that were at that time pending were as follows: The Malvy case, the affair of the Bonnet Rouge, of Bolo Pasha, Joseph Caillaux, Loustalot, Turmel, Humbert, Lenoir-Desouches, Paix-Seailles, and Leymarie. Of these, according to last accounts, Malvy, Caillaux, Loustalot, Humber, and Turmel, who were members of parliament, were to be tried by the high court.


Multiple members of French Parliament were tried for treason


	The others were to be tried by court martial. Space is lacking for more than a bare outline of these affairs, which, moreover, were not important individually, but only as indicating when taken together a menace to the public morale. It was generally believed that these activities were increasing and that the government not only was culpably lax in dealing with them but that some of its members had been in dishonorable relations with the evil-doers.


subersive (defeatist) activities were increasing and people believed the government was letting it happen or helping it.


	The indignation over these conditions was the chief factor in bringing into power M. Clemenceau, who had been for a long time back the cheif assailant of defaitiste intrigue and ministerial complaisance.


The scandals helped Clemenceau rise to power


	The Bonnet Rouge, which at first an apparently loyal paper and contained among its contributors many well known men whose patriotism was unquestioned, gradually assumed an attitude that aroused suspicion. In a veiled manner it conveyed impressions tending to the advantage of the enemy.


How did Bonnet Rouge help the enemy? Should read what they actually said


	It was thought to be subsidized by funds secretyl derived from enemy sources. Its manager, M. Duval, whose frequent journeys to Switzerland in 1916 drew the attention of the police, was placed by them under surveillance in May, 1917, and soon afterwards, on his returning from one of those trips, they found in his possession a check for 125,000 francs, which they took from him and photographed. They then restored it to him, without notifying either the Ministry of War or the minister of the interior.


so the police found the check and gave it back--did Duval try to cash it?


	For this negligence the responsible military official was reprimanded and M. Leymarie, cheif of the Bureau of Public Safety, was obliged to resign.


I think this is saying they were reprimended for not notifying Malvy and the Ministry of War? what if they were subjects of the investigation? this seems off


	Meanwhile, the authorities began an investigation into M. Duval's financial errands in Switzerland and it was found that he had received large sums of money from German sources. He was charged at first with "commerce with the enemy" and later with the more serious frime of "intelligence with the enemy."


Duval charged with treason-sounding things


	The case was still under judgment at the close of the year. Meanwhile the editor of the Bonnet Rouge, one Almereyda, alias Vigo, was found to have recieved from Duval a check for 200,000 francs and was arrested on the charge of complicity with the latter's operations.


Duval working with enemy, editor of Bonnet Rouge Almereyda found to be complicit and had check from Duval


	The next step was the seizure of a chest of papers belonging to the Bonnet Rouge, which were thought to contain incriminating documents. Soon afterwards Almereyda was found dead in prison, with marks upon his throat indicating strangulation, which he had apparently achieved by means of a shoe-string attacked to the foot of his bed.


police seized Bonnet Roughe papers. Editor was found dead in prison from strangulation.


	The circumstances were obscure; there had been gross negligence on the part of the prison officials, who were subsequently disciplined, and there was doubt whether he had killed himself, been murdered, or died a natural death. The three medical experts who reported on the cause of death decided in favor of suicide.


unusual circumstances around editor's death, unsure if murder, police were negligent


	M. Leymarie was arrested later on the charge of intelligence with the enemy and his case was pending at the close of the year.


Cheif of Burea of public safety (who had given check back to Duval after photographing and didn't notify Ministry of Interior or war) was arrested with treason-sounding charges (related to the death of Almereyda? doesn't say explicitly)


pg 276

M. Humbert was involved with newspaper *Journal*, obtained funds from Bolo Pasha. Bolo charged and Humbert sold paper to Lenior Desouches. Humber was sued for possible misconduct in relations with Bolo.  Senate suspended his parlimentary immunity and Humbert resigned as director of the *Journal.*


A check for 25K francs was found on Turmel, and he was suspected of "commerce with the enemy." Loustalat charged with "intelligence with the enemy" for interviews with Abbas Hilmi, reputed to be German agent. M. Paix-Sealles charged with revealing information likely to aid enemy in the field. But most conspicious cases were Malvy, Pasha, and Cailluax.


	...The Malvy Case. The charges against M. Malvy which had been made with more or less definiteness in the press for a long time past were brought to the notice of the Senate in an interpellation by M. Clemenceau on July 22. On October 4 a letter addressed to the premior by M. Leon Duadet, director of the Action Franqiase, denouncing M. Malvy in unmeasured terms as a traitor to this country was read at M. Malvy's on request to the Chamber of Deputies.


Why did Malvy want Daudet's charges read? did Duadet charge Malvy with the wrong things? Possibly, Malvy and co-conspirators hoped to politicize the investigation. What did Malvy actually do?


	The government began an investigation and at the close fo the cabinet council on October 16 M. Painleve declared he had reached the conclusion that all charges were baseless. The judicial department was going ahead with the case and the government left it in entire independence but it seemed to be the duty of the government to declare its opinion that the charges were false. This apparent inconsistency in the matter of deciding the case in advance while leaving the courts free to pursue it aroused much criticism and brought forth the comment of M. Duadet int he Action Francaise that it was "stupefying."


Painleve said all charges basless, judicial dept. kept on investigating but government wanted to cover for Malvy. This deciding case in advance angered people. Dueadet also criticized this in his newspaper.

	
	Early in November the authorities searched the residence of M. Malvy's former director, M. Leymarie, and seized a number of documents. Suit was brought against the latter for commerce with the enemy. On November 23, M. Malvy requested in the Chamber that a committee of thirty-three should examine the charges against him. The Chamber elected a committee of eleven to decide up this question and it reported favorably. Thereupon the Chamber appointed the committee of thirty-three. On November 29 this committee's report recommending that M. Malvy be placed on trial was submitted to the Chamber which approved it by a vote of 512 against 2. As there was no precedent for such a case a bill was introduced in the Senate to cover it.


cops find incriminating documents on Malvy's aid. Then Malvy asks for committee to examine charges against him, which he gets, who then recommend that Malvy be placed on trial.

I guess the government first tried to cover for Malvy, then after the search and charges against Leymarie they changed their minds.


	The specific charges made by M. Leon Duadet were that he had given diplomatic and military information to the enemy, especially in connection with the attack on Chemin des Dames. The case was to go before the high court. IN the press attacks on M. Malvy he was accused of being on intimate terms with Almereyda, of relations with Bolo, and of tolerating or conniving at various intrigues against the national defense, in short of a policy of laissez faire toward dangerous elements in the state if not actual complicity with th em. In his own defense he attributed these attacks to the machinations of his political enemies, pointed to the peace between the social classes and groups which had been maintained under his administration since the beginning of the war, declared his policy had been one of toleration and measure, and specifically denied having any relations with ALmereyda or the Bonnet Rouge or Bolo Pasha frmo the time when their true character became known to him.



Duadet says Malvy gave Germans intel on attack at Chemin des Dames. Press says Malvy was close to Almereyda and Bolo, and tolerated subversion of national defense and maybe complicit in this. Malvy said the charges were politically motivated and he had been doing a good job and didn't know about the misconduct of Bolo, Almereyda, or the Bonnet Rouge.


	The Affair of Bolo Pasha. Bolo Pasha was arrested on the charge of attempting to corrupt the French public by funds derived from German sources. The accused who had derived his title from the dethroned khedive had aroused suspicion by this frequent journeys to Switzerland, Italy, and Spain. He was watched by the special police, who found that in his various enterprises he had spent several million francs. Bolo's explanation was that long before the war he had made investments in America and that at the time of his arrest he was in possession of a fortune of seven million francs, all of which was deposited in American banks. He said he had never handled money either in Italy or in Switzerland. The police than caused inquiries to be made in Switzerland and in the United States. In the United States the authorities exerted themselves to the utmost and it was on the basis of the information which they sent to the French authorities that Bolo was arrested. The United States State Department addressed to the French foreign office a telegram to the effect that various sums of money exceeding in all two million dollars had been depositied in the course of 1916 in the name of Paul Bolo who was then in Paris, and that these depositis had been made by the Deutsche Bank of Berlin. A great part of this money had already been remitted to Paul Bolo by transfers on a French bank. Further evidence was accumulated after his imprisonment, and the case was on trial at the close of the year.


Bolo arrested for propaganda using German funds. special police investigated his spending. A U.S. inquiry found information that led to his arrest, finding deposits to him by Deutsche Bank.


	Some of the ramifications of the affair have been indicated in preceeding paragraphs. M. Humbert, who, as noted above, had obtained money from Bolo in order to assume financial control of the *Journal*, said, when questioned on the subject, that he had inquired into Bolo's antecedents and found that they were good and that responsible people were willing to vouch for him. Among those who did so was M. Monier, first president of the Court of Cassation. M. Malvy had also appealed to M. Monier's endorsement of Bolo in defense of his own failure to suspect him. Upon the arrest of Bolo it was decided to summon M. Monier before the higher council of the magistracy to explain. Dissastisfied with his explanation, the council prounounced the sentence of dismissal from his office. This was the most severe penalty that could be imposed in a discplinary suit of this nature. M. Monier, previous to the trial, ahd requested that he be allowed to retire in possession of his rights on the ground of ill-health, but as the rule prescribing this did not apply to cases where officers had been dismissed for cause his application was disregarded.


Humbert and Malvy got funds from Bolo, and so were ultimately funded by Deutsche Bank. They claimed M. Monier vouched for Bolo and this is why they accepted his money. Monier was summoned before council of the magistracy, but they didn't buy his explanation and dismissed him from his office.


	Bolo's relations with M. Caillaux formed also an element of suspicion in that affair, as noted below. 


	...THe Caillaux Case.  In the summer of 1917 M. Joseph Caillaux made his appearance in the Chamber for the first time since the war began. Newspaper attacks on him which had been made from time to time for many months past now increased. Rumors of disloyal activities in Italy, association with pro-Germans, pacifists, and traitors, had long been circulated. The London Times accused him of intriguing in Italy, on behalf of a German peace. This he publicly denied. SUspicion was heightened by the high praise bestowed upon him by the press of the Central Powers or of circles friendly to them.


The French press had been accusing Caillux of various forms of treason and dubious associations. The Central Powers press praised him, which increased suspicion of him.

This is strange--the Okhrana was said to have a lot of influence in the French press, and the Foreign Ministry likewise in the German press. Neither were doing Caillux any favors. Was he framed?


	By French and English journalists he was charged with a campaign of German propaganda in France and elsewhere, including the support or encouragement of a chain of newspapers which in a veiled manner were working in the German interest. Among the papers mentioned were Le Pays, the Agence Republicaine d' Informations, Les Nations, and above all the Bonnet Rouge, and many others; and he was said to be more or less responsible for an association of these papers under the name of the Republican League which was designed to carry on a campaign in parlimentary circles.


Caillaux was accused by French and English journalists of supporting German propagnda newspapers, especially Bonnet Rouge. Said to be responsible for an organization campaigning in parliament.


	In the Allied press jhe was spoken of as the most sinister influence in French politics whose return to political power would be disastrous. For a long time M. Caillaux paid little attention to these attacks, treating them as the calumnies of his political enemies. For the most part he contended himself with an occasional sweeping denial. At Mamers in the summer he made a speech expressing irreproachably patriotic sentiments to his consituents. He and his friends subsequently referred to this speech as evidence of his loyalty. NEvertheless, attacks up on him, more or less open, continued in the press by which he was charged with being in relation with the treasonable and defaitiste elements in France and abroad.


Allied press said he was the "most sinister influence in French politics." Caillaux ignored the attacks for awhile, but sometimes denied them. He made a patriotic speech and he and his friends pointed to this to say he was innocent, but the press didn't buy it and kept saying he was associated with traitors and defeatists.


	In November M. Gustave Herve, editor of the Victoire, having published these accusations against him in his journal, M. Caillaux gave out an explicit denial. M. Herve, however, repeated his charges, definitely accusing him of complicity in the Bolo affair and the affair of the Bonnet Rouge, and association with treasonable movemements in France and Italy. He concluded with a challenge to M. Caillux to bring suit against him on the charges of defamation. Soon afterwards M. Caillaux summoned him before the Court of Assize at Mons, in the department which M. Caillux represented in Parliament. Meanwhile, the examining magistrate in the cases of alleged intelligence with the enemy called as a witness M. Caillaux who had paid the sum of 36,000 francs during the trial of his wife for murder to the Bonnet Rouge and was said to have been in close relations with M. Almeyreda down to the time of the latter's death. In an announcement that he gave susequently to the press he declared that since the outbreak of the war he had contributed no funds to that paper and had had nothing to do with its policy.


Editor of Victoire M. Herve accused Caillaux of complicity in Bolo and Bonnet Rouge affairs and association with traitors, and challenged Caillaux to sue him. Caillaux summoned him to court. Caillux was called as a witness to the treason investigations. He had paid 36,00 francs to Bonnet Rouge during the murder trial of his wife (this true or alleged?) and was said to be close to Almeyreda. Caillaux told the press he gave no money to the Bonnet Rouge and had nothing to do with its policy since the outbreak of the war.


------

http://www.history.com/this-day-in-history/caillaux-trial-begins-in-paris
	As war threatened in the Balkans, the attention of much of the French people focuses instead on the sensational case of Madame Henriette Caillaux, whose trial for the murder of Gaston Calmette, editor of the newspaper Le Figaro, opens on July 20, 1914, in Paris.

	Joseph Caillaux, a left-wing politician, had been appointed prime minister of France in 1911. He was forced out of office the following year, however, after he was accused of being too accommodating to Germany. Chosen again as a cabinet minister in 1913, the relatively pacifist Caillaux was under almost constant attack from the right. In his personal life, Caillaux was relatively indiscreet, parading his mistresses around during his life as a bachelor and carrying on a secret love affair with one of them, his future second wife, while he was still married to his first wife.


Madame Caillaux was on trial for murdering editor of newspaper Le Figaro. M. Caillaux was forced out before the war in 1912 under accusations of being too accomadating to Germany, but became minister again in 1913 while always under attack by the right. He cheated on his wife.

Caillaux was an old friend of Poincare but opposed him while Poincare was proposing to increase the length of military duty. Caillau opposed the bill and was attacked by the not-yet murdered journalist, Gaston Calmette. Calmette claimed to have dirt on Cailluax, including wire communications said to show Caillaux's sympathy to Germany. Caillux tried to blackmail Poincare into preventing this, which worked. (?) Calmatte continued to threaten to publish Caillux's love letters. Latter, Henriette Callaux shot Calmette dead.

The Caillux trial was sensational and politicized, and distracted from the news of the July days and the start of World War I.



------


	On December 11 a demand was made for the trial of M. Caillaux of the following charges preferred by Gen. Dubail: Friendhsip with Bolo and Almereyda, in evidence of which letters were produced; relations with Signore Cavallini, now in prison in Italy on charges of disloyalty; plots while in Italy to bring about an alliance between France and Germany against Great Britain and to the detriment of the Entente Allies; complains of his activites on the part of the diplomatic representative sof the ALlies of Frnace; in general evidence sufficient to justify the charge that since the beginning of the war he had attempted to hamper the military operations of the Entente Allies and promote the success of the enemy.


Gen Dubail demanded to try Caillux for relations wtih Bolo and Almereyda, a plot to bring an alliance between France and Germany, and attempts to hamper Allies and help enemy militarily.


	ON eof th emost important documetns bearing on M. Caillux's activities in ROme was given out at the close of the year 1917. It was a letter addressed on December 22, 1916, by the naval attache at Rome to the chief of the general staff of the navy. He said that this letter written at the insistance of the Ambassador declared that the following facts were known to the Ambassadors of Russia and Great Britain, to the Italian foreign minister, and to other authorities. On December 17, it declared, M. Caillux made an appointment wit the Italian cabinet minister, Signore Salandra. The latter avoided the interview bjut sent in his place Signore Martini, former minister for the colonies. M. Ciallu, in the course of his conversations with the Italian minister, referred slighingly to M. Briand, whose ministry he said was doomed. There would follow, in his opinion, a ministry under M. Clemenceau which would not last long for it would be a war ministry and France could not continue her military effort after the spring. By that itme, he said, he himself would come to power and would sign the peace which would certainly astonish the entire would by the advantages which Germany would concede to Italy and to France. The whole cost of the war would be paid by RUssia and the Balkans. WHat Germany wished was the road to Bagdad, an enlarged Bulgaria, and an enlarged Turkey. That would be no injury to France for the French field of action was in Africa. Serbia and Rumaia would dissapear, but that would be no more than they deserved. As soon as the peace was signed, he said, France would conclude a treaty with Germany, Italy, and Spain against England and Russia which were her real enemies. The writer then went on to say that the Italian foreign minister would have expelled M. Caillux from Italy and seized his papers if he had not feared that his course would be displeasing to the government of France. He waited only a sign from the French government to do so. THe writer further charged M. Caillux with conferences with the most pacifist of the prelates at the Vatican whom he urged to redouble their efforst for peace, saying that if Italy concluded a separate peace France would be obliged to abandon the struggle; with promising that if he came to power he would renew diplomatic relations with the HOly See; also with having been in close relations with the editor of a pro-German newspaper in Naples.


A letter from the naval attache at Rome to the navy was important evidence of Cailluax's activities. The letter said Caillaux met with Italian official and told him he would come to power in France and sign a peace treaty with Germany and Italy against England and Russia. Writer said the Italian foreign minister was angered by this. the Writer also said Caillux schemed with pacifists in the Vatican and acused him of close relations with the editor of a pro-German newspaper.


	A committee of eleven took up the question of suspending parliamentary immunity and on December 16 decided in favor of doing so. The removal of immunity was voted on December 22 by 392 to 2 (115 not voting). On the same day M. Caillaux made an address of two hours on his own behalf. The letters to Bolo and Almereyda were, he declared, entirely innocent. His sole fault had been in yielding to his impulses in making acquaintances, and he could be blamed at most for a certain carelessness in this respect. WHy should he be blamed for trusting Bolow, when so respectable an authority as M. Monier had vouched for him? As to the charges against him, while in Italy, they were the result merely of a quarrel with M. Barrere, the French Ambassador there. The essentials of the policy which he had advocated were as follows: No alliance with Germany so long as the question of Alsace-Lorraine remainded unsettled in the interest of France; but the possibility of an accord with Germany on determined and limited points. He declared that he had supported every governemtn since the beginning of the war. As to the charges against him, he declared his hands were clain. Machinations against him had succeeded merely becaue he was too contemptuous to pay attention to them. He demanded that his parliamentary immunity should be suspended in order that he might prove his innocence. At the close of the year he was confined in prison awaiting trial before the high court.


An overwhelming majority voted to suspend Cailluax's parlimentary immunity. Cailluix said his friendly letters to Bolo and Almereyda were from carelessness and were ok since Monier vouched for Bolo. He said the charges of shcemes in Italy were from a political enemy. He demanded his parlimanetry immunity suspended to prove his innocence, and became imprisoned awaiting trial.


The whole Caillaux trial reminds me of the Russia investigations going on today--basically smearing people for guilt by association. If Caillaux genuinely wanted to reach a diplomatic peace with Germany, the accusations of German sympathies and fervent adherence to the fallacy of guilt by association in the press would have made such an effort politically very risky for him. In general, half of the suspicious characters in France (e.g. Poincare, Foch, others) were absurdly anti-German and harsh on Germany, as demonstrated at versailles. Such an attitude would be condusive to war and it appears an influence campaign to divide France and Germany for this purpose was enacted.


pg 269


Clemenceau came to power and said the government had been too lax in stopping pacifists and traitors. He said the accused would be put on trial and the pacificst campaigns and German propagand and treason would stop.



------


https://books.google.com/books?id=2WSuCwAAQBAJ&pg=PA150&lpg=PA150&dq=Merrheim+secretary+Metallurgistes&source=bl&ots=yWxriLQtb7&sig=o8Z0bFD9QiuKp8wgPyRoYTVp7_s&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwiwh-z0rsfXAhUB3SYKHWabDcwQ6AEIKzAB#v=onepage&q=Merrheim%20secretary%20Metallurgistes&f=false


Merrheim was a socialist agitator in France. Reportedly, French authorities were lenient in his trial. He was involved with "Syndicalism," apparently a type of socialism.



------

Smith War and 'Politics': The French Army Mutinies of 1917


Pedronicini's *Les Mutineries de 1917* set tone for historiography of mutinies: soldiers refused to move to front lines and held anti-war demonstrations, Nivelle removed, Petain came in and saved day with reforms and court martials, "made clear there would be no more quixotic offensives until takes and American support," saved France.

Smith comes off as skeptical of this account.


	...Paradoxically, according to Pedroncini, Petain could resolve the mutinies because he understood that the mutinies were a matter of 'war' and not 'politics.' That is to say, their causes lay principally in military frustration at three years of a tired and failed offensive strategy, and not in the 'politics' of outside subversion, pacifism, and defeatism.


Pedronicini sounds like Gilbert and Bernard maybe? played down subversion and asserted blame was on the military failure and high expectations. Gilbert and Bernard actually identified two narratives "army point of view" and "government point of view" and took side of government.


	...This article will argue that this interpretation of the mutinies is not so much wrong as skewed and incomplete, because of its focus on Petain and the senior military leadership.


Smith says he wants to argue right off the bat


pg 182


most of the mutinies occured "well after" decision to stop Chemin des Dames and after Petain assumed command on May 15


Chemin des Dames was similar to the Artois offensive (try to break line and end in stalemate), although there weren't any mutinies then (were expectations similarly high for Artois?)


pg 183

Mutinees didn't occur in front lines, but at "various embarkation points -- most often at the moment soldiers were ordered to enter the trenches." Smith saids it would hard to mutiny in the trenches in the middle of life or death situations (didn't Denikin describe a soldier basically doing exactly that, though? Smith says most mutinies happened after the offensive was wearing down.)


pg 184


	...they involved a collective and categorical refusal of orders to take up positions in the front lines. Second, for the most part, the demonstrations concluded with soldiers leaving for other units to encourage further resistance. Third, soldier's stated demands--sometimes including peace though revolution if necessary--went well beyond boundaries of expression normally conceded even to citizen-soldiers.


soldiers quit fighting, sometimes called for a revolution to end the war and left to encourage more mutiny. An attempt at a wider revolution?


Smith says the soldiers were more or less in control during the mutinies and punishment was only doled out after the mutinies.

"soldiers demanded first and foremost immediate peace"


	...Despite command insitence of the importance of external subversion, it must be stressed that no evidence exists of an actual link between the events in the Fifth Division and any civilian pacifist movement. Rather, I would suggest, demanding peace enabled soldiers to reach out to civilian compatriots in the interior. In so doing, soldiers envisaged an alliance of citizen-soldiers and citizens that would end the war, an alliance that proved unworkable once their different agendas became clearer.


Smith says no evidence of a link between 5th division mutinies and any pacifist movement

Gilbert and Bernard's paper says they did find some revolutionary literature among the soldiers, though. So what gives?


------

https://books.google.com/books?id=563gvssRPvkC&pg=PA165&dq=%22Chemin+des+Dames%22+mutiny+Russian+OR+bolshevik+OR+socialist+OR+marxist&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwj0o4CykMzXAhUSfiYKHdXmCtoQ6AEIJjAA#v=onepage&q=%22Chemin%20des%20Dames%22%20mutiny%20Russian%20OR%20bolshevik%20OR%20socialist%20OR%20marxist&f=false

haha what


------


https://www.amazon.com/Dare-Call-Treason-French-Mutinies/dp/0760722404

a book on the mutinies


can it be trusted?


------


https://books.google.com/books?id=zzlsAwAAQBAJ&pg=PA123


	The aftermath of the French military mutinies had led to upheaval in the French political establishment. The widespread conviction that the loyal army had been corrupted by agitators led to a search for defeatist elements. Paul Bolo was identified as a German agent charged with corrupting the press, and the Dutch exotic dancer Margaretha Zelle, better known by her stage name Mata Hari, was executed for espionage. Louis Malvy, a leading socialist proponent of peace by negotiation, was accused by Clemenceau of treason and forced to reason as minister in August. He was arrested in November and Clemenceau's old enemy Joseph Callaux was arrested in turn in January 1918. The appointment of Clemenceau as Premier was the embodiment of a new and ferocious resolve. A supporter of Alfred Dreyfus in the affair which had split France, a friend of Claude Monet and a hater of Germany, the "Tiger" had criticized each wartime ministry in the name of patriotism. Now he had a chance to show leadership.


I guess that is the major result of the mutinites--the trials, press attacks on "defeatists," and rise of Clemenceau. Was that some sort of plan? whose?


seems like author tries to paint as politically motivated, like it was Clemenceau accusing Malvy of treason to grab power for himself.