https://wuhstry.wordpress.com/2016/09/30/a-portrait-of-hindenburg/
	Paul von Hindenburg was born to a Prussian aristocrat, Robert von Beneckendorff und von Hindenburg, in 1847 in Posen, Prussia (now Pozen, Poland). Hindenburg’s parents were engaged in a morganatic marriage due to his mother, Luise Schwickart, being a daughter of a medical professional and this fact was not seen as favourable to Hindenburg due to her barely occupying any attention in his journals. 


What's up with Hindenburg's mother?


	...Hindenburg was also a major mind behind the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk with Russia. 


maybe worth looking into


	...Hindenburg was of advanced age during these years but proved to be a good president for a Germany attempting to renew itself, particularly when hit by the Great Depression of the early 1930s. Hindenburg had a particular fear of communism which led to dismissals within his government including the chancellor Heinrich Brüning. 


should look at who he purged


	...1932 saw Hitler attempts to become chancellor of Germany. Hindenburg initially rebuffed these due to Hitler not coming from the right social class, and had not had a majorly established career in the military during the war, but Hindenburg gave in January 1933 and Adolf Hitler began his track to power.

	During the years that Hindenburg was in power he began to show his age and was more susceptible to persuasion.


why does this read like an excuse?


------


http://www.historynet.com/hindenburg-and-ludendorff.htm


says Ludendorff and Hindendburg met in 1914


	...On June 28, 1914, Austro-Hungarian Archduke Franz Ferdinand’s assassination by a Serbian national in Sarajevo, Bosnia-Herzegovina, precipitated the diplomatic crisis that led to the outbreak of World War I that August. Ludendorff became the deputy chief of staff of German 2d Army, which advanced to invade France through Belgium’s heavily fortified positions around Liege. As the army’s representative to an advanced force assigned to seize Liege, Ludendorff assisted in the city’s capture with a brave bluff that gained the surrender of the fortress’s defenders. Thus, in the first days of the war, Ludendorff had forged a well-earned reputation as an energetic, “can-do” officer who got results.


how good is Ludendorff? Was this really him, or did they have enough influence to throw battles in his favor if they wanted to? Some details of the battle of the Marne suggest much of the war could have been orchestrated.


	...Upon arrival at 8th Army, Hindenburg and Ludendorff found the plan in motion and immediately visited their unit commanders. Although Ludendorff’s nerves began to fray when the two corps reported slower than desired progress, Hindenburg calmed his anxious chief of staff. Ludendorff need not have worried; the operation was a stunning success, and the August 26-30 Battle of Tannenberg was Germany’s greatest victory of the war. The Eastern Front triumph instantly made Hindenburg a popular hero throughout Germany, while Ludendorff gained high prestige within the General Staff.


Hindenburg the brains behind Ludendorff? others say Hindenburg's role was like Ludendorff's advisor


	...Undeterred, Ludendorff planned a resumption of the German offensive using railroads to quickly move forces for a Second Battle of Warsaw. Yet since the Russians withdrew southwest from Warsaw to Lodz, German forces pursued vainly without defeating the escaping enemy. Ludendorff, however, represented the disappointing result as a “victory” and requested more reinforcements to “finish off” the Russians. Meanwhile, the kaiser arrived in Posen to promote Hindenburg to field marshal and Ludendorff to lieutenant general.


why did the Kaiser promote them after a defeat?


	...Falkenhayn created a theater headquarters, OberOst, to manage the war on the Eastern Front, with the Hindenburg-Ludendorff team in command.


Falkenhayn promotes Ludendorff again


	The pair, however, immediately planned major operations in the East that Falkenhayn did not want since that would siphon off troops and resources from the Western Front. Hindenburg therefore circumvented Falkenhayn, using his personal direct access to the kaiser. Falkenhayn was forced to transfer four German army corps from the West to the East.


A set-up for the "fight" among German High command?


	...As the pace of Eastern Front operations subsided by March 1915, Hindenburg went on elk hunts, visited his wife in nearby estates and sat for two large portraits (with an eye on posterity, he ensured the paintings had his medals right and that they captured all the buttons on his greatcoat). The job-obsessed Ludendorff grudgingly attended Hindenburg’s frequent dinner parties, but when Hindenburg retired to the parlor after dinner, Ludendorff returned to his office and labored until past midnight.


Hindenburg more social, Ludendorff "job-obsessed"


	...Ludendorff hated Falkenhayn and found it impossible to work with him. Increasingly frustrated, Falkenhayn ordered Ludendorff transferred to the Austro-German army in Galicia and asked Hindenburg to resign. Predictably, Hindenburg not only refused to retire but also appealed to the kaiser for Ludendorff’s return. Wilhelm II despised Ludendorff’s personal ambitiousness, but he nevertheless needed Hindenburg’s popularity with the German people. Thus, he forced Falkenhayn to work with Hindenburg and to return Ludendorff to OberOst headquarters.


Hindenburg saves Ludendorff's career


	...By early 1916, after months of stalemate in France, Falkenhayn planned a brutal offensive at Verdun to “bleed the French army white.” He wanted a victory without exposing his army to comparable losses, but the monthslong slaughter at Verdun bled both armies through horrific casualties. When Falkenhayn’s Verdun plan failed, his credibility plummeted.

	By August, victories on the Eastern Front led to Hindenburg replacing the discredited Falkenhayn as chief of the German Great General Staff. Ludendorff meanwhile became first quartermaster general in charge of all German army operational planning. This command team would lead Germany throughout the remainder of the war.


the "fight" leads to Hindenburg replacing Falkenhayn after his grand failure (or his mission completed?)


	...As Hindenburg and Ludendorff took charge of Germany’s war effort in August 1916, they faced an alarming military situation. Disturbingly high casualties at the Somme (July-November 1916) and Verdun (February-December 1916) wrecked any plans for large-scale German offensives in either the West or the East. Their armies were overstretched; 6 million German troops faced 10 million Allied troops on the war’s far-flung battlefields.

	In early September, Hindenburg and Ludendorff met with commanders on the Western Front at a major conference at the headquarters of Crown Prince Rupprecht of Bavaria. Army group commanders, commanders of German 1st, 2d and 4th armies, and all chiefs of staff attended. The conference broadened Hindenburg and Ludendorff’s understanding of Western Front conditions, and the two grasped the absolute necessity for a balanced economy of resources across all military theaters. Ludendorff interpreted the situation as confirming his belief that occupying deep entrenchments lowered the fighting prowess of Germany’s soldiers. He favored a flexible, more mobile defense – a thinly held forward zone with powerful, well-organized counterattacks to recover lost ground.

	As the managers of Germany’s total war effort, Hindenburg and Ludendorff now faced far-reaching problems of mobilizing the whole country’s economy for a battle of national survival. Hindenburg became the front man, the face of Germany’s war effort, while Ludendorff supervised all staff work on military and political issues by personally assuming an enormous workload. The huge task overburdened Ludendorff to the point of physical exhaustion, while waiting for a strategic shift in the war strained his easily frayed nerves.


did Hindenburg become more popular around this time? how?


	...Germany, however, still needed to find the troops to make the Western Front offensives possible. Then, when Bolshevik revolutionaries seized control of Russia from November 1917 to March 1918, the subsequent collapse of Russia’s war effort in the East allowed massive numbers of German troops to be shifted to the Western Front. The stage was set for what became known as the Ludendorff Offensives of early 1918.


although the last offensives were named after Ludendorff


	...With the Ludendorff Offensives having failed, in September 1918 the German army on the Western Front fell back to its final line of resistance, the Hindenburg Line. Now realizing that the flood of American troops arriving in France made Germany’s defeat inevitable, Ludendorff told Hindenburg there was no alternative but to seek an armistice. Hindenburg took the news silently.

	On September 29, 1918, the command team advised the kaiser, chancellor and foreign secretary that Germany must seek peace. On October 3, the kaiser appointed Prince Max of Baden to lead the government and to seek the best settlement terms possible. The prince, an opponent of Ludendorff, demanded from Hindenburg an admission in writing that there was no further chance of forcing peace on the enemy.

	While the prince formed his government, Ludendorff composed a proclamation to the army that defied the prince’s authority and rejected U.S. President Woodrow Wilson’s peace proposals, claiming that unconditional surrender was “unacceptable to [German] soldiers.” A leaked copy reached Berlin, prompting an enraged Prince Max to ask the kaiser to choose between him and the insubordinate Ludendorff. On October 26, Ludendorff was forced to resign. He told his wife, “In a fortnight we shall have no empire and no emperor left, you will see.”


what happened here?


------


Asprey book - The German High Command at War


pg 9


	A magnificent public relations effort, aided by strict military censorship, caused this aura of invincibility to grow to godlike proportions during the next two turbulent years Hindenburg and Ludendorff— the Duo — established a military dictatorship that trampled on the Empire's constitution and dealt Germany's wavering democracy a fatal blow.


was the media involved? seems this would have to be the case. This is interesting, since the foreign ministry had control (or thought they had control) of many in the media (Herwig, "Clio Decieved"), but the foreign ministry was said to be out of touch with the military.


	...Emil Ludwig published a highly revealing biography of Hindenburg in 1935. This was followed a year later by John Wheeler-Bennett's scathing work, Hindenburg, The Wooden Titan. The impact of these books on German and Western readers was impressive but was soon absorbed by the turbulent events of these frenetic years, as was the case with the severe condemnation of Ludendorff s generalship published in 1939 in the memoirs of a highly decorated general-staff officer. General Friedrich von Lossberg.


other sources on Hindenburg and Ludendorff (more follow in text after this)


pg 11


	...A real literary bomb exploded in 1967 with publication of Fritz Fischer's Germany's Aims in the First World War, which blamed German industrialists and militarists for the war (a thesis that so enraged German establishment scholars that Fischer followed it two years later with a book defending his first)


What is Asprey's opinion of Fischer?



