

sleepwalkers book:


	By this time, however, over two weeks had elapsed and the Austrians were getting no nearer to Apis, the real author of the conspiracy. Looking over the witness statements, it is hard not to agree with the historian Joachim Remak that Princip, Grabež and Čabrinović pursued a strategy of deliberate obfuscation that led ‘by way of splendid confusion from initial denial to reluctant – and incomplete – admission’.46 All three took pains to limit the damage done by Ilić’s revelations and to prevent as far as possible the inculpation of official circles in Belgrade. None made any mention of the Black Hand; instead they hinted at links between Ciganović and the Narodna Odbrana, a red herring that would lead the Austrian investigators far from the true trail.


	...The shock of the event still resonates in these early reports: ‘we have still not recovered from the crushing impact of yesterday’s catastrophe’, wrote the Austrian minister in Belgrade, ‘so that I find it difficult to assess the bloody drama in Sarajevo with the necessary composure, objectivity and calm . . .’50 Vengeful rage, hostile underlying assumptions about Serbian objectives and a growing body of circumstantial evidence shaped official Austrian perceptions of the crime from the first hour, in a process that was only obliquely linked to the discoveries generated by the legal investigation itself.




on Russian mobilization:

	What tilted the Tsar towards caution on 29 July was the arrival at 9.20 p.m., just as the order for general mobilization was about to be dispatched from the central telegraph office, of a telegram from Kaiser Wilhelm II, in which the Tsar’s German cousin pleaded that his government was still hoping to promote a ‘direct understanding’ between Vienna and St Petersburg and closed with the words:

		Of course, military measures on the part of Russia which could be looked upon by Austria as threatening would precipitate a calamity we both wish to avoid, and jeopardise my position as mediator which I readily accepted on your appeal to my friendship and my help.

	Saying ‘I will not be responsible for a monstrous slaughter’, the Tsar insisted that the order be cancelled.


	...It is worth pausing for a moment to ponder on the fact that the impact of a telegram from the Emperor’s third cousin in Berlin was sufficient to stay an order of general mobilization for nearly twenty-four hours. After the revolution of February 1917, the Russian revolutionary publicist and scourge of Tsarism Vladimir Burtsev was placed in charge of the Tsar’s private papers, in which he discovered a cache of personal telegrams exchanged between the German and Russian emperors. Signing as ‘Willy’ and ‘Nicky’, the two men communicated with each other in English, adopting an informal, at times even intimate tone. The discovery of these documents was a sensation. In September 1917, the journalist Hermann Bernstein, who was reporting on the revolutionary events, published them in the New York Herald and they were reissued in book form (with a foreword by Theodore Roosevelt) four months later.



these are the telegrams:

https://wwi.lib.byu.edu/index.php/The_Willy-Nicky_Telegrams


------

https://archive.org/stream/in.ernet.dli.2015.183514/2015.183514.The-Origin-Of-The-War-Of-1914-Vol-11_djvu.txt
	This was enough to alarm Sazonov, and on 21 July Pourtalfes wrote 
to Bethmann HoUweg that 

		since Sazonov's return he has been very anxious about the relations between 
Austria-Hungary and Serbia. He told me that he had most alarming reports 
from London, Paris and Rome, where the attitude of Austria-Hungary was 
everywhere causing growing concern. , . . Sazonov seized the occasion to 
pour out once more in his usual manner his resentment against Austro- 
Hungarian policy. . . . There were, he said, powerful and dangerous forces 
at work ... to plunge Austria into war . , . namely Count Forgach ‘an 
intriguer ofthe worst sort’ and Count Tisza, a half madman. . . . Their aim 
was the annihilation of Serbia (Kaiser’s marginal note: ‘would be the best 
thing, tool’) ... If Austria-Hungary was determined to break the peace, 
she would have to reckon with Europe (Kaiser’s marginal note: ‘Nol but 
with Russia, yes!’) . . . Russia would not be able to tolerate Austria- 
Hungary’s using threatening language to Serbia or taking military measures 
(Kaiser : ‘qui vivra verra’). ‘Russia’s policy’, said M. Sazonov, ‘is pacific but not 
passive.’® 

	Sazonov’s words caimot always be taken at their full value.


Sazanov blames war on "powerful and dangerous forces" and "madmen" in Austria



------

from Hamilton and Herwig "The Origins of World War I"

Richard F. Hamilton seems iffy

other excerpts in "moltke"


	There was even less "calculation" or "slide" in the French case. With President Raymond Poincare and Premier/Foreign Minister Rene Viviani literally out at sea on the battleship France during a state visit to Russia from 16 to 29 July, a virtual foreign policy power vacuum existed in Paris. Neither War Minister Adolph Messimy nor Finance Minister Jean- Baptiste Bienvenu-Martin possessed the power to commit the nation to war. Technically speaking, the war powers rested with the president, but his orders had to be countersigned by a minister, and he could declare war only with the consent of the Senate and the Chamber of Deputies. 23 In July 1914, there was no meeting of the Council of Ministers, which had the authority to mobilize the armed forces. Nor was there a military conference at which French leaders debated the relative merits of war and peace. The professional diplomats at the Quai d'Orsay were generally anti-German; the ambassadors operated independent fiefdoms. President Poincare exercised an influence over French foreign policy far exceeding his constitutional authority, greatly influencing the selection of foreign ministers and, in the case of his close friend Maurice Paleologue, also that of ambassadors. All had come to accept three stable elements of French policy: national pride, fear of Germany, and peace through strength.


Poincare exceeded powers granted by French constitution in foreign policy, selection of foreign ministers, and ambassadors.


	The imperative of French policy in 1914, Eugenia C. Kiesling sug- gests, was simple and clear: to preserve the tie to St. Petersburg at all cost. France could not afford to "decide" whether to stand by Russia. While Premier Viviani publicly avowed that his policy was to "resolve the conflict ... in the interest of the general peace," he never- theless described France as "entirely ready to support the action of the [Russian] imperial government. " 24 France's ambassador to St. Petersburg, Paleologue, throughout the July Crisis counseled an aggressive stance on the part of France and Russia, including if need be recourse to war. On 25 July and again on 28 July, Paleologue assured Russian Foreign Minister Sazonov of "unequivocal French support." 25 Poincare's com- mitment to the Russian alliance was so firm that, in the words of one historian, he pursued it even at the cost of "connivance in dishonesty and blackmail." 26



Poincare acted like the French-Russian alliance was all that mattered and ignored everything else.


	...With strict constitutional propriety, the decision for war was made by the Asquith cabinet, with the consent of parliament. But the cabinet did not act in unison; rather, it was swayed, in the end, by a resolute minority. The prime mover was Grey, aided vociferously by First Lord of the Admiralty Winston S. Churchill. Asquith was less enthusiastic about a continental commitment, but trusted Grey's professional judgment. The rest of the cabinet eventually went along with that move toward war. In fact, Germany's violation of Belgian neutrality and Chancellor von Bethmann Hollweg's ill-chosen words about the 1839 Articles constituting but "a scrap of paper" did much to persuade them. Again, decision making by coterie.


Grey was "prime mover" for war. Hollweg's "scrap of paper" comment and Germany's violation of Belgian neutrality helped him (was that Moltke's fault?).


goes on: a push for war in Italy but prime minister rejected it (at first); Young Turk leaders in turkey signed a secret alliance with Germany Aug 2. 1914


	...Prime Minister Pashich, while recognizing that "anarchistic elements" may well have had a hand in the assassination at Sarajevo on 28 June 1914, nevertheless was reluctant to identify the Black Hand as perpetrator of the act for fear of thereby exposing the interconnection among the civilian and military decision-making bodies in Belgrade. In the end, fully aware that Serbia was still recovering from the losses of the two Balkan Wars, he decided not to go to war but, rather, to leave the onus for declaring war with Vienna. Failure to obtain clear commitments of support from St. Petersburg undoubtedly also played a role in this decision. As Richard C. Hall argues, the murder at Sarajevo "caused" nothing; rather, it was the use made of the killings, especially by Vienna, that set Europe on a course toward war. Far from "sliding" into armed conflict, Pashich, recognizing the immediacy of war, moved the government to the southern city of Nish and ordered the military to initiate basic precautions.


says Pashich acted out of fear of exposing the involvement of the Black Hand in high-levels of the Serbian government. Knew that Austria-Hungary was using the assassination as a pretext for war.


	...Beyond continental Europe and the Ottoman Empire, tough, aggressive senior decision makers also charted the course toward war. In Japan, the European war brought relief and joy. What senior leaders termed the great "confusion" would spell opportunity for Japan, an opportunity to become the "chief nation of the Orient." On 8 August 1914, the cabinet approved Japanese participation in the war alongside Great Britain. That decision was the work primarily of one man, Foreign Minister Kato Takaaki. In what Frederick R. Dickinson describes as a "complete usurpation of the foreign policy prerogative," in August 1914, Kato, after consulting with just a handful of his closest advisors in the Foreign Ministry, took the genro, or elder statesmen, completely by surprise. 40 There was no input from the public, the popular press, or financial and industrial circles. And far from being a "slide" into war, Japan's entry into that conflict was the product of the machinations of its foreign minister.



Somehow, Japan's foreign minister single-handedly gets them involved in the war.


	...Last but not least, the United States entered the war in April 1917 in large measure also because of one man: Woodrow Wilson. Having at- tempted for the first three years of the war to influence its course and outcome through diplomatic means, the president finally ran out of alter- natives after Germany's initiation of unrestricted submarine warfare on 1 February 1917.

	John M. Cooper first examines, and then rejects, the customary argu- ments of scholars that "powerful forces" such as precedent, economics, culture, geopolitics, and popular opinion brought about the American de- cision to enter the war. He suggests instead that these "powerful forces" were but "background influences" and that they acted on the side of non- intervention. Rather, "Wilson remains at the center. He and, in certain critical respects, he alone cast America's lot for entry into World War I." With Congress out of session for all but three months between August 1914 and the end of 1915, the president acted on his own, with complete faith in his enormous self-assurance.


say Wilson the one man who brought the U.S. into WWI. Congress was out of session.


	...During the war, arguments of intention, of sinister premeditation were dominant, these basically being arguments of aggressive purpose. A year or two after the end of the war, a sea change occurred and arguments of inadvertence - no one wanted war - were given increasingly wide approval. Both arguments were basically political in character, serving as an aid first in the conduct of the war, and then in the conduct of the peace. Since little serious documentation was available at that point, the actual bases of the decision making were essentially unknown. The most striking instance of the shift in usages appears in the case of David Lloyd George, who, in a less than a year, changed from a committed intentionalist to become the principal author of the nonjudgmental slide thesis. In January 1920, he demanded that Kaiser Wilhelm II be formally tried as a war criminal, perhaps at Dover Castle. Then, in December of that year, he made a famous speech in which he argued that the nations had "glided, or rather staggered and stumbled" into war. 42 As late as 1936, Lloyd George still maintained, "No sovereign or leading statesman in any of the belligerent countries sought or desired war - certainly not a European war.


Lloyd Geroge inconsistent


	...And so it was in 1914. For decades, European leaders had "gamed" the likely scenario for war on the Continent. In each case, they rejected the notion that a war could be localized or isolated. In each case, they recognized the danger of diplomatic escalation leading to armed conflict. In each case, they knew the dangers inherent in a general European war. In each case, they accepted those risks and dangers in July and August, and they decided for war with the full expectation of winning and thereby solving the difficulties that prompted them to consider armed conflict in the first place. That is what made the July Crisis radically different from previous crises, such as the two Moroccan wars, the two Balkan wars, and the Tripolitanian war.


WW1 origins "radically different" from that of previous wars


	...In fact, there was a surprising single-mindedness of purpose in the deci- sion makers of 1914. They recognized almost to a man that the strategic argument of perceived decline or threat demanded the call to arms. In short order, the murder of Archduke Franz Ferdinand receded from the forefront of their considerations. Instead, the leaders in Vienna and Berlin, St. Petersburg and Paris, persisted in their view that war alone could re- solve their perceived precarious positions in the European concert. And when two monarchs, Wilhelm II and Nicholas II, at the last moment tried to pull back from the precipice, the coteries in Berlin and St. Petersburg forced them back on course.


They all came up with the same stupid argument for war ("we are in decline or threatened and so must go to war") and forced "Nicky and Willy" into war after they tried to make peace


	...The "slide" thesis is also rendered spurious by the various actions, espe- cially in the three critical capitals - Vienna, Berlin, and St. Petersburg - to block possible mediation of the crisis. Foreign Minister Berchtold as early as 3 July boldly informed the German ambassador, Heinrich von Tschirschky, of his government's need for a "final and fundamental reckoning" with Serbia. Kaiser Wilhelm II at Berlin endorsed that ini- tiative with the terse marginalia, "now or never." Vienna refused a state funeral for Archduke Franz Ferdinand in part because such a formal gath- ering might have offered the crowned heads of Europe an opportunity to discuss and perhaps to coordinate their responses to the assassination at Sarajevo. Vienna was determined to strike out against Belgrade; Berlin seconded that initiative. And once Russia had decided to block the pro- posed Habsburg "punitive expedition" against Serbia by way of mobiliza- tion, Foreign Minister Sazonov forestalled further discussion and possible resolution of the crisis by instructing General Ianushkevich, the chief of the General Staff, to smash his telephone!


there were many moves to block mediation of the crisis from multiple sides.


	Perhaps the last words on the "slide" thesis should go to one of the pivotal players, the chief of the German General Staff. Already in March 1913, General von Moltke confided to the Italian military attache Germany's intention to violate Belgian neutrality in case of war. The next war, Moltke stated, would be between France and Germany. In brutal terms, he allowed that this war would be "a question of life or death for us. We shall stop at nothing to gain our end. In the struggle for existence, one does not bother about the means one employs." 44 And in retirement in June 1915, Moltke in a private letter to Field Marshal Colmar von der Goltz spoke openly of "this war which I prepared and initiated." 45 No drift, no slide.


Moltke admits to starting the war, plans to violate Beligian neutrality and "stop at nothing to gain our end."


	...We suggest instead that a more intelligent reading of the events of July 1914 might have caused a different opin- ion as to whether the entire Balkans were worth the bones of millions of grenadiers - Pomeranian or otherwise.