



https://archive.org/stream/in.ernet.dli.2015.276141/2015.276141.Three-Who_djvu.txt
	Though less ruthless and thorough in the suppression of oppo- 
nents, and enormously less numerous than the GPU to which we 
have become accustomed, the Okhrana was second to no other 
secret political police of its day. Where peasant risings and mutinies 
gave it the pretext, it proclaimed martial law and used gallows 
and firing squad. In other provinces, it made use of the power of 
administrative deportation without trial, up to a maximum of five 
years in Siberia. But a roster of millions of prisoners in concentra- 
tion camps would have seemed an incredible nightmare to this little 
band of routine-incrusted police officials. According to the testi- 
mony of its chief, Vasiliev, at the height of its power it never had 
more than one thousand secret agents in all Russia, nor more than 
one hundred in the capital. He complains that he had "very few” 
operatives abroad and, every time a congress was held in foreign 
parts, had to further debilitate his Moscow and Petersburg forces 
by sending some of his best agents. 

	But, with its years of political experience, the Okhrana sensed 
earlier than Lenin the nature of the new political situation, and 
prepared, too, to “go underground” once more. With forces that 
seem numerically so modest today, it now developed a system of 
espionage that eclipsed even the Zubatov and Gapon experiments. 
If, at every stage of our story so far we have found a police agent 
in the midst of each fairly numerous gathering, now we shall find 
them penetrating into the topmost secret hierarchies of the Social 
Revolutionary Party and the Bolshevik faction of the Social Demo- 
cratic Party. 



------


https://translate.googleusercontent.com/translate_c?depth=1&hl=en&prev=search&rurl=translate.google.ru&sl=ru&sp=nmt4&u=https://ru.wikisource.org/wiki/%25D0%259F%25D0%25B0%25D0%25B4%25D0%25B5%25D0%25BD%25D0%25B8%25D0%25B5_%25D1%2586%25D0%25B0%25D1%2580%25D1%2581%25D0%25BA%25D0%25BE%25D0%25B3%25D0%25BE_%25D1%2580%25D0%25B5%25D0%25B6%25D0%25B8%25D0%25BC%25D0%25B0._%25D0%25A2%25D0%25BE%25D0%25BC_4/I._%25D0%259F%25D0%25BE%25D0%25BA%25D0%25B0%25D0%25B7%25D0%25B0%25D0%25BD%25D0%25B8%25D1%258F_%25D0%25A1._%25D0%259F._%25D0%2591%25D0%25B5%25D0%25BB%25D0%25B5%25D1%2586%25D0%25BA%25D0%25BE%25D0%25B3%25D0%25BE_%25D0%25BE%25D1%2582_17_%25D0%25BC%25D0%25B0%25D1%258F&usg=ALkJrhiIEjKHyE2YUe-YT7T0hZghwdquPA
	By the very end of 1915, agents had been set up, and reports were already in my hands that outlined the nature of the future's tasks set by this organization and its desire to play a dominant role in the direction of the labor movement.


Okhrana had "desire" to play "dominant role" in labor movement, what about Beletsky? his motive seems a mystery so far


	...All this, in connection with the discovery of the secret mission pursued by M. Vasilchikov, sent with secret letters to Petrograd, gave me grounds to become interested in this matter and to clarify the role and activities of gendarme officers sent to the headquarters of the armies. It turned out that, due to the highest approved instruction, during the secondment period, they were not subordinate to either the headquarters or the department, they did not have experienced managers, and communications [ 143 ] they did not keep internal agents, and in this important, especially during the war, internal coverage of the country in this area was weak. In view of this, after reporting this gene.



doesn't translate well. Were Gendermes doing their own thing for awhile?


------


https://books.google.com/books?id=h3By77UU4nIC&pg=PA6&lpg=PA6
	It was in the wonderland world of the Bolshevik Party that the constant interplay between *agents provocateurs* and the Leninists' own methods had the most lasting consequences. One government agent, Roman Malinovskii, rose to the exalted position of the leading Bolshevik in Russia while Lenin was in enforced exile, also serving as chair of the party's Duma fcation in 1912-1914. Even when he was exposed, an incredulous Lenin initially kept him in place, not fully facing the facts until 1917. According to Robert Service moreover, Malinovkskii's 'main task was to remove any obstacles to the schismatic measures [within the revolutionary left] proposed by Lenin.' 'The Okrana saw Lenin ... the single greatest obstacle to unity amongst Russian Marxists ... as a brilliant executor of the task demanded by the Emperor: the disintigration of the RUssian Social-Democratic Labour Party. The enhancement of Lenin's career was [indirectly] the Okhrana's confidential priority.' Their intersts certainly coincided. 'The Okhrana wished to splinter the resurgent workers' movement and Lnin wished to bring it under his control.' The secret police were happy to concentrate on arresting Lenin's opponents on the party's Central Committee, the 'Concilitators,' to make any reconciliation between Bolsheviks and Menshevks unlikely (the RSDLP split into the two factions in 1903; reconciliation proved impossible after 1912).



------


http://www.jstor.org/stable/4201792?seq=1#page_scan_tab_contents

a book on Beletsky

was associated with Okhrana a year before heading them

after leaving continued to supply info on Rasputin to Grand Duke Nikolai Nikolayavich and General Bogdanovich, who were "trying to counteract Rasputin's influence at court."

sketchy guy Prince Andronnikov tells him to get to know Rasputin, which he does. Beletsky tells Rasputin "we're cool" because Beletsky supposedly didn't try to kill him while head of Okhrana.

Andronnikov also hooks up Beletsky with his candidate for Minister of the Interior Khvostov, the leader of the Rights in the Duma. Khovstov gets elected by Sep 1915 and with Beletsky help try to smooth things over between Tsar and Duma. Rapsutin's support is needed for this.

Khovstov later tells Beletsky to ruin Rapsputin, which he supposedly tries to do without care for doing dirty work.


This is all according to Beletsky.


https://books.google.com/books?id=g4hixDZdqL0C&pg=PA301&lpg=PA301&dq=beletsky+Andronikov&source=bl&ots=loerVAlhaG&sig=CinP8BAk-3crTKlEoUdxaBYXMGA&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwjgo9Lj2N_WAhXJ3YMKHXw0DcsQ6AEILDAC#v=onepage&q=beletsky Andronikov&f=false


Khovstov said to have maintained close relations with Black Hundred organizations


------

Fontanka book:

	Ivan in turn began to
expel boyars from his new country and to give their lands to his own
agents. To command Russia as a whole, he formed a terrorist band of
pseudo-monks, the oprichniki, and sent them out to frighten resistors
into subservience.
Bearing symbolic brooms and the severed heads of dogs on the
saddles of their black horses, the black-robed oprichniki made clear
4 Fontanka 16
their mandate to sniff out and sweep away opponents of Ivan. Two
foreigners among them, J. Taube and Elbert Kruze, identified the tsar
as their monastic head: "Himself [Ivan iv] was the Father Superior,
Prince Afanasy Viazemsky was the Cellarer, Maliuta Skuratov was the
Sexton and along with the others they managed the various activities
of monastery life. Himself, both of his sons, and the Sexton would
ring the bell." Members not in church each morning at four "were
sentenced to eight days penance." 3
As the infamy of the oprichniki spread, one visiting Englishman, the
trader and diplomat Jerome Horsey, wrote of their acts: "This crueltie
bread such a generall hatred, distreccion, fear, and discontentement
thorow his kyngdom, that there wear many practices and devises how
to distroy this tirant; but he still did discover their plotts and treasons,
by inoiblinge and countenancinge all the rascalest and desperatt soul-
diers he could peek owt, to affront the chieff nobillitie." 4
Showing signs of deepening derangement, Ivan iv insisted that
plotters lurked everywhere. To identify them, he put select oprichniki
to work as political investigators under M.L. Skuratov-BePsky and
V.G. Griaznoi, who solicited denunciations as their prime source of
evidence. That many came forward caused a German then in Russia,
A. Schlichting, to write: "Muscovites seem to possess a kind of innate
malevolence that makes them accuse and slander one another in front
of the tyrant and fume with hatred for one another so that they kill
themselves by mutual slander." 5
Sometimes the oprichniki concocted charges, as Skuratov and Griaz-
noi did to rid the tsar of a cousin, Prince Vladimir Staritsky, whose
rule over a separate territory made him suspect. Soon after his arrival
for a visit, the two confronted Staritsky with the charge that his cook
had confessed to a plot to poison Ivan. Thus justified, they forced the
prince to down a lethal drink.
Likewise targeted was the Metropolitan Philip, the head of the
Russian Orthodox Church, who came into disfavour for interceding
on behalf of innocent persons denounced as traitors. The bribe for
Philip's accuser was a bishop's mitre. When, during a visit from
Skuratov, Philip died in the monastery where he was imprisoned, the
chief of the oprichniki blamed the airlessness of Philip's cell.
Whole families, clans, and even townships fell victim, but most
brutal was the 1571 purge of Novgorod, a formerly independent city-
state that Ivan distrusted. As told in the "Chronicle" of Novgorod, a
tramp directed the oprichniki - very likely the instigators - to a forged
document conveying that Novgorodians wanted to serve the king of
Poland, then at war with Ivan. 6 A three-week probe followed, during
which the oprichniki tortured and killed thousands. Some reports set
5 Political Investigation to 1825
the toll at sixty thousand, but historians estimate from two thousand
to fifteen thousand fatalities. 7


origins of the Okhrana?

	...During this same year, Pahlen assessed the security implications of
the populist agitators in an official report. 4 The Third Section should,
he wrote, spread agents throughout society to detect and stifle subver-
sives before they acted against the state. Gendarmes and security
agents should, for example, monitor all self-education circles because
radicals used such groups to inflame well-meaning persons into com-
mitting crimes.

	Even more important, Pahlen urged that security agents infiltrate the
secret cells of revolutionaries to enable the Third Section to foil their
plots and arrest their members, a course that would, in a few years,
become a major thrust of the tsarist security force. He left unexamined
how such arrestees would be investigated and processed, just as he
said nothing about his ongoing concern that Gendarmes, as Third
Section agents, too often put security objectives above judicial stan-
dards during preliminary inquiries and, since 4 June 1874, judicial
investigations.


their signature characteristic of infiltrating revolutionary, criminal organizations


	...Within months, in the summer of 1879, the underground revolu-
tionary party, People's Will, combined a number of radical cells into
a single terrorist organization. As conspirators, these narodniki
sharply differed from the naive radicals whom police had so easily
rounded up when they went to the people in 1874. To move freely
and anonymously, for example, the narodniki forged internal passports
47 Third Section to Department of Police
for themselves that bore false names. They used the proper forms, an
archive of official signatures, and appropriate stamps and seals.
People's Will also placed an agent of its own within the Third
Section. The idea belonged to Alexander Mikhailov, a leader of
People's Will and a revolutionary of iron will and absolute convic-
tions. Back in 1878, he had met Nicholas Kletochnikov, a sickly,
leftist provincial, adrift in his mid-thirties, and had sensed his longing
for a noble commitment. Mikhailov had therefore convinced Kletoch-
nikov that he could be enormously useful if he would join the Third
Section and inform on its activities. On Mikhailov's advice, Kletoch-
nikov had taken rooms adjacent to those of a Third Section officer's
widow and then cultivated her. Through her ministrations and influ-
ence, he had become a valued specialist in the Third Section in 1879
and had gravitated into its political department, the Third Secretariat,
later that same year.
As a trusted insider, Kletochnikov was able to copy the most secret
documents and pass them on to People's Will, and he used his extraor-
dinary ability for memorization to the same end. Lev Tikhomirov, the
terrorist, personally dealt with Kletochnikov and credited him with an
impressive capacity for detail. "He studied with strong interest and
devotion, and his notes about the matters that passed before him had
the quality of those of a talented novelist. He passed on not only
names and pseudonyms of agents, but even striking portraits of each
of them, wonderfully capsulized in a few words. He described their
physical features, character, and habits." i5
Kletochnikov would move to the Third Section's successor agency
in 1880 and avoid detection as a radical spy until January of 1881.
In his subsequent statements to interrogators and the judges who
would convict him of treason, he would claim not to have known that
he was dealing with terrorists. Although his death sentence would be
commuted to life imprisonment, he would die behind bars in 1883.


People's will had a prominent agent in third section in 1879


	...Meanwhile, in August 1879 Alexander n had again nearly fallen
victim to an assassin. In a widely publicized follow-up, People's Will
made the chilling announcement that it had condemned the tyrant tsar
to death. The group gained yet more notoriety in November when
several of its terrorists used dynamite, the recent invention of Alfred
Nobel, to blow up the train that they mistakenly thought was carrying
the tsar.
A still greater impact would result three months later from the
assassination attempt by Stepan Khalturin, who, by securing a posi-
tion as a mechanic at the Winter Palace, had managed to smuggle
several pounds of dynamite into the basement of the palace, two floors
below the imperial dining room. While Khalturin was making his
48 Fontanka 16
preparations, Third Section agents arrested a leader of People's Will,
A.A. Kviatkovsky, and found among his papers a plan for the Winter
Palace with the imperial dining room marked by an X. Police at once
conducted a surprise nighttime search in the mechanics' quarters but
missed the dynamite that Khalturin was concealing under his pillow.
On 4 February 1880, he lit a fuse and walked out of the palace. The
huge explosion destroyed the guard room immediately below the
dining room, killed eleven persons, and injured fifty-six more, but the
blast entirely missed the tsar and his circle. They had not yet entered
the dining room, which, in any case, suffered little damage.


Third sections bungles some prominent assassination attempts vs. Tsar, misses large quantities of dynamite under pillow


	...Intended to kill the tsar, the dynamite put an end to the Third
Section by forcing Alexander to reorganize his security forces. Named
to impose central control over all security personnel was his new
Supreme Executive Committee for the Preservation of State Order and
Public Tranquillity. Given dictatorial powers as its head was Count
Mikhail T. Loris-Melikov, a distinguished general in the Russo-Turkish
War of 1877-8. Although he soon became known as "vice-Emperor,"
Loris-Melikov would show a commitment to reform that would
prompt many to term his time in office a "dictatorship of the heart."


leads to reorganizations of secret police


	...Taken into custody in January 18 81 was a dedicated terrorist in the
People's Will, Ivan Okladsky, who, when threatened with a long
sentence of hard labour, agreed to switch his allegiance to the tsar.
Soon after he revealed the locations of two apartments, one printing
plant, and one dynamite factory belonging to his former comrades. He
would enter imperial service as a secret agent and play that role for
the next thirty-seven years. 35 In January, as well, the revolutionaries
lost their eyes and ears at Fontanka 16 because their spy Kletochnikov
was exposed.


arresting a guy to turn him as an agent


	...Ignat'ev had already set police work on a new course. Political
investigations by non-uniformed state agents had grown dramatically
since the assassination of Alexander 11. Increased surveillance of the
public was now being conducted by outside agents, 49 and more inside
agents were infiltrating subversive groups. Now both secretly served
the newly-named successor of the Third Section, the Division for the
Protection of Order and Social Security, over time to be commonly
known as the Okhranka.


so not sure of details but sounds like assassinations led to paranoia, increased power of secret police


	...Inside agents had to make their way onto the territory of the enemy
by winning acceptance as terrorists themselves. They were required to
operate under strict rules and could never relax their guard. Only with
express permission from their superiors in the Okhranka could they
use illegal weaponry and distribute illegal literature. Should they
commit a criminal act without prior approval, they were subject to
prosecution. (Should they be caught in a group arrest of subversives,
on the other hand, the Okhranka eased them into safety in ways that
did not make their radical comrades suspicious.) Barred from having
a wide circle of friends and owning frivolous possessions, these disci-
plined, self-restrained agents were not unlike monastics. Each inside
agent swore to report nothing but the truth, used code names for
himself and others, dealt in secret with a single Okhranka contact -
his case officer or controller - and forfeited his job if he lost his cover
or credibility. He or she dealt with pressures and risks on a daily basis.
The controller therefore constantly tested both the reports and the
psychological state of his agents. Given the stresses, the inside agent
usually retired within two years, or sooner, if his controller insisted.


this seems off


wasn't that other guy an agent for 37 years?

they don't seem very "disciplined" or "self-restrained" either


	...There were other revolutionaries who, without solicitation from the
Okhranka, stepped forward to place their expert knowledge of the
revolutionary movement at the disposal of the police. Alert to counter-
penetration from the revolutionaries, the Okhranka was naturally
suspicious of those who volunteered to work for the police. One of
these one-time revolutionaries was P.S. Statkovsky, who eventually
headed the Okhranka, first in St Petersburg and then in the St Peters-
burg region, until he retired in 1912, with honours


another revolutionary guy heading the Okhrana


	...A police agent, who remains anonymous to this day, describes a
different route to a position in the police in his memoir in 1917. 13 The
author tells that he was enrolled at St Petersburg University in 1912.
during the crackdown on student unrest by the minister of public
education, Leo Kasso. When the Okhranka approached him to report
on student behaviour as an insider, he saw no harm in describing
legitimate student grievances. He himself led a protest against the
firing of several liberal professors only to suffer arrest and imprison-
ment for two years. Denied readmission to the university after his
release, he found his income as a tutor insufficient to support his wife
and daughter. Only with a certificate of political reliability could he
resume work for a coveted university degree, so he asked the Okhranka
to give him one. Statkovsky, now a top officer in St Petersburg,
demanded service in return. The student was to use his renewed
contact with agitators in the university to evaluate secret denuncia-
tions already in the hands of the police. He could, after all, save many
innocent persons from unfair punishment. Statkovsky reminded his
petitioner: "You suffered and ought to know how important it is to
know the truth ... I propose that you correct our work."


so what where they feeding this guy bullshit?

	At their next meeting in a cafe, Statkovsky brought along a blond
man in glasses with a kindly appearance, whom he presented as Ivan
Fedorov, the student's contact with the Okhranka. Then Statkovsky
excused himself. Fedorov, as the conversation developed, turned out
to have "an exceptional mind, familiarity with literature, history,
social science; he did not resemble the Gendarmes who had crudely
conducted the interrogation into my case; each of his words was
redolent of a suborning gentleness. He spoke with a soft smile sin-
cerely and simply." This was Dobrovolsky, then the notorious head of
the St Petersburg Okhranka's secret agents.


his handler won him over, apparently well-spoken and came off as kind 


	Restored to the university, the student received regular payments
from the Okhranka, but his assignments became more demanding. He
was to evaluate the student "mood," although without naming per-
sons. Next came pressure for the names of leaders of the continuing
anti-Kasso agitation at the university. Von Kotten, the overall head of
the St Petersburg Okhranka, made himself known and underscored the
demand for detailed reporting. The student now heard a threat from
the Okhranka: "Do not try to operate on two fronts ... If you do, we
shall have to part from you. If so, we will deal with you in a political
sense and will spread the word about our conversations with you ...
I say this by the way. I hope that you will understand that you must
pass along information on everything that -happens ... We do not
demand provocations [incitement of others to illegal acts] from you,
but only want to be au courant on all events."



ended up blackmailing him and wanted information from him


	Soon the reluctant agent learned that his reports had provided the
sole grounds for several arrests. With persons denounced by him
suffering in prison, the student felt deepening remorse. His comrades,
moreover, began to suspect that he was an informer. The student
therefore asked for a court of honour, claiming in his memoir that he
hoped, without confessing his guilt, to be expelled and thereby
released from his burden. To his dismay, Statkovsky assured him that
the court would exonerate him because two members of the panel
were Okhranka agents.


so they had a lot of agents probably


	At this point, the student claims to have lost faith in "truth and
justice" and concluded that the Okhranka's power was without limit.
Already totally compromised, he decided to raise his earnings to those
of a full-fledged officer of the Okhranka. Suborning was everywhere,
but the student blamed neither the Okhranka nor himself. The fault
lay with "the system, the environment of the government and society,
that life of abnormalities which drives a man from the revolution to
the Okhranka and from the Okhranka back to the revolution."


decides Okhrana is all-powerful, sells soul to them and blames "the system"

	Even as radicals were enlisting in the Okhranka, through a combi-
nation of inducements, subtle pressures, and threats, there were
Okhranka agents and officers who were passing over to the revolu-
tionaries. The American writer Lincoln Steffens, for years an investi-
gative reporter of corruption in the governments of large cities,
observed psychological similarities in many policemen and the crimi-
nals they pursued. Numerous corrupt policemen, although remaining
overtly law enforcement officers, engaged in criminal activity. 14 In
Russia, of course, not only did the police become "criminals," in the
sense that they joined the radicals; but the reverse also happened: the
"criminals" became able and dedicated policemen. Steffens did not
observe this reverse phenomenon in America, but it was characteristic
of the Okhranka that some of its best agents and officers had started
their careers as dedicated opponents of the imperial regime.


blurred lines between Okhrana and "the revolution"


	Crossing the line from one side to the other offered no great change
in the nature of the work. Both camps operated extensive clandestine
organizations and used similar methods. Both camps included many
opportunistic persons who transferred their allegiances from one side
to the other at will. On the other hand, some of the defectors who
had been totally dedicated to a cause became disillusioned, and
deserted to work for the enemy. Another factor was that each side was
actively trying to recruit or place persons in the other camp because
of the enormous intelligence advantages to be gained. The existence
of persons extending blandishments naturally led to at least some who
were attracted by the bait. Then there were persons who managed to
help both sides substantially and it is extremely difficult even today to
calculate and compare their contribution to the police as against their
contribution to the revolutionaries.



I noticed that


	There is another possible motive for those who served one side and
then the other. Because there were agents who threw themselves into
their work - whether for the police or the revolutionaries - it seems
that the work, not the allegiance mattered most. They might have been
attracted to the thrill of dangerous life based on deception. There seem
to have been persons who relished the hunt, only they were the game
and their object was to deceive the hunters from both camps.


an interesting theory (was this Kim Philby?)



	...The Okhranka multiplied
entries quickly; well before 1914, their number exceeded one million,
each one of them on a colour-coded card. Yellow ones, for example,
denoted students; green was for anarchists. Red meant allegiance to
the Socialist Revolutionary Party, and blue to the Social Democrats.
Persons relegated to white cards had no known links to the revolu-
tionary movement, but were, for the most part, in the main stream of
cultural, social, and business affairs.



Red for commies, White for the rest of them



	...Fontanka also kept abreast of technical inventions that revolution-
aries might use. Through their own office on inventions, okhranniki
acquired information on new contrivances around the world and
maintained an archive of such developments. The first successful
flights of airplanes after the turn of the century attracted the attention
of the Okhranka because the new conveyance was a plausible instru-
ment for carrying out assassinations and terrorist attacks.


Okhrana always thinking ahead


	...Usually accurate, the perlustrators could make mistakes. On one
occasion they mixed up the envelopes from two embassies and sent on
to the Dutch foreign ministry a report written by a Spanish diplomat.
Another time, the perlustrator accidentally dropped into a courier's
portfolio a gold cuff link. The recipient decided that the gold cuff
belonged to the diplomat back at the embassy in St Petersburg and
sent it back to him. At the St Petersburg post office, the same per-
lustrator opened the portfolio on its return trip and to his delight
discovered his lost cuff link and reclaimed it. He destroyed the accom-
panying explanatory note to the diplomat.


hehe


	...Another Druzhina agent in Paris who subsequently served the For-
eign Agency was P.I. Rachkovsky, best remembered for his flamboyant
operations. 4 Rachkovsky, born into the hereditary gentry in Bessarabia
in 1853 but educated only at home, had first supported himself as a
minor bureaucrat and peripatetic informer for the Third Section. By
early 1879, he was editing a Jewish newspaper and contriving radical
links to make credible his subsequent "arrest" as a political criminal
- all to improve his usefulness as a full-fledged inside agent for the
Third Section.

	On 2,0 August 1879, however, exposure by the underground news-
paper of the People's Will of his role as a double agent had forced
Rachkovsky to leave Russia. When the tsar's assassination brought
him back in 1881 under a false name, Rachkovsky joined the Druzhina
and proceeded to Paris as part of the secret brotherhood's foreign spy
bureau. In 1882 he returned to Moscow, there to enter the reorganized
security force within V.K. Plehve's Police Department.


Rachkovsky involved in espionage before Okhrana


	...In this same period, Landezen continued to inform Rachkovsky
about Russian radicals in Switzerland, with whom he still mingled
easily as a seeming confederate. One tightly-knit group of explosive
experts that Landezen seems not to have penetrated - the Circle of the
People's Will, which was allied with a St Petersburg contingent that
included Lenin's older brother Alexander - gave itself away on 9 Feb-
ruary 1888 by accidentally detonating the bomb that it was assem-
bling. Swiss police easily apprehended one badly injured member, Isaak
Dembo, and learned enough from him before he died to establish
grounds for expelling nineteen of his comrades from Switzerland.


this mean anything? some circle of the people's Will in contact with Lenin's brother and the Okhrana deported them


	Maintaining his pose as a dedicated comrade, Landezen followed
the revolutionaries to Paris by transferring his studies to the French
agricultural institute. And at this juncture, in close proximity to the
headquarters of the Foreign Agency, he gained acceptance within the
radical emigre circles that included Tikhomirov. Although one or two
cautious revolutionaries pointed to circumstantial evidence that could
link Landezen with Rachkovsky, the absence of damning proof caused
most of the emigres, including a key leader, Vladimir Burtsev, to find
him trustworthy. To guard against compromising Landezen, only
Rachkovsky, Zvoliansky, Durnovo, Alexander in, and one or two
other officials knew the identity and accomplishments of the Foreign
Agency's most effective spy.


the spy who compromised them also knew Burtsev, who trusted him


	...Zvoliansky helped bring about the awarding of a medal to Rachkov-
sky, when a report deplored his lack of decoration despite "fifteen
years" of accomplished security work. Rachkovsky received the Order
of St Anna, third class. In addition, Zvoliansky urged that Rachkovsky
no longer be required to submit periodic reports, given the tremendous
demands of his work and his proved excellence in meeting them. The
Foreign Agency was "among the best (if not the best)" of Russia's
security sections, insisted the inspector, and all credit belonged to
Rachkovsky.


Hiding anything?


	...When he later wrote his memoirs, Burtsev would recall that he felt
merely surprise, not suspicion, when Landezen had suddenly reap-
peared in Paris in mid-January, just as he and Rapoport were making
plans to set off for Russia. 28 Burtsev had consequently felt no reserva-
tions about introducing Landezen to some bomb-making comrades
before he and Rapoport began their daring journey. 


Burtsev Landezen relatinship suspicious?


not sure exactly what's going on here bby apparently Landezen would infiltrate terrorists then later changed his name to Harting


	...On the diplomatic front, Landezen had helped forge better relations
between Russia and France by delivering the bomb-makers to the
French police in 1890. The reports of Rachkovsky convinced Alex-
ander in of the excellence of French cooperation with the Foreign
Agency, with the end result that a softening of differences between
autocratic Russia and republican France occurred in the 1890s.


Harting also contributing to Russia-France alliance


	...All these successes provided proof to St Petersburg of the essential
services, going well beyond their original mandate, that internal agents
and the Foreign Agency provided to the imperial government. Their
effectiveness against anti-tsarist groups coalescing in Russia and West-
ern Europe was axiomatic to their masters as they made themselves
indispensable in areas well outside of police work. Furthermore, they
pushed police work into new areas of criminal and semi-criminal
activity, political influence, and "public relations."


also doing PR and influence ops


	As Landezen had
shown, by far the best method of discovering who belonged to the
interdependent network of revolutionaries at home and abroad was to
infiltrate the ranks of plotters already known. It was a tricky business
requiring strong nerve and a special flair, two qualities that enabled
internal agents such as Landezen to do so well for so long. But it also
required inducing radicals to participate in breaking the law which, it
was argued, they would have done anyway.


like World War one! all those soldiers were just about to throw themselves into the trenches and murder each other anyway


	...By 1890, his fifth year as head of the Foreign Agency, Rachkovsky's
high standing with the tsar had translated into authority over imperial
security matters in Europe that few, if any, dared challenge. Thus it
was Rachkovsky who, each fall, personally headed the imperial body-
guard in Fredensborg during the tsar's annual vacation at the palace
of his mother-in-law, the Queen of Denmark. He was there, ready to
serve as the intermediary, when his agent Jules Hansen arrived in
September 1891, with a secret letter from the French premier, Charles
de Freycinet, proposing close military consultations between France
and Russia. 37

	Recalling this period, Count S.Iu. Witte, who became minister of
finance in 1892,, singled out Rachkovsky for being instrumental in
bringing France and Russia together in an entente. According to
Witte's rather extravagent assessment in his memoirs, Rachkovsky
"had more influence on the course of our rapprochement with France
[a military convention was agreed to in 1893-94] than did our ambas-
sadors." 38 Witte may have let his gratitude for the entente (which
made French banks a ready source of loans) colour his thinking, but
he further described Rachkovsky as a "remarkably intelligent man, in
fact the most gifted and intelligent police official I have ever met."


Rachkovsky credited with bringing France into Russia alliance



	...When Nicholas n succeeded his father in 1894, Rachkovsky pru-
dently watched for any moves against him by critics who might attempt
to exploit the change in leadership. His opponents in St Petersburg
could easily argue that his expenditures and gratuities were excessive,
especially during a lull in terrorism; they could question also his ethics,
his secret powers, and his high living. Vulnerable though he was,
however, Rachkovsky knew that most officials favoured granting him
free reign, given the amorality and secrecy of ruthless revolutionaries.


Rachovsky got dirt on the officials?

also had an assassin squad


	...Whether or not he had felt threatened, the next year Rachkovsky
formally expanded his operations into Berlin because, as he made clear
to St Petersburg, Russian emigres had concentrated there to avoid his
Paris-based security network. Adroitly preparing for a new centre of
Okhranka activity, Rachkovsky first obtained permission from the
German police to send six Russian agents into the German capital;
then, to win the necessary approval to build that force into an Agen-
tura or secret service, he summoned Landezen, now living in Belgium
under his new name of Harting, to take up residence in Berlin as a
wealthy Russian merchant with connections in high political circles.
Following the example of Rachkovsky, Harting courted local digni-
taries with sumptuous dinners at his fine house.


expand operations into Berlin, Harting schmoozing dignitaries


	At least by December 1900 the secret imperial Agentura in Berlin
was in full operation as an independent entity, and Harting would
command it until 1905. Among his agents would be Zinaida
Zhuchenko, Lev Beitner, and Dr Jacob Zhitomirsky, a deft infiltrator
who became a trusted collaborator of Lenin himself.


officially there by 1900


	...With his sphere of operations limited once more to France and
Switzerland as the new century began, Rachkovsky found himself
mainly confined to the commonplace task of embassies worldwide:
building foreign sympathy for his government and its causes. As he
had done since 1884, Rachkovsky routinely paid locals for pro-
Russian tracts and articles, including, besides Hansen, Calmette from
Figaro and Maurras from Petit Parisien. Giving a code name of
Ratmir to a writer named Raymond Recouli suggests that he hired
some journalists to gather intelligence as well. Or perhaps that he
exaggerated the role of favoured persons to justify raising their pay.


Rachkkovsky buying-off journalists



------

nice easy explanation of the parties:

https://historyrevision.files.wordpress.com/2012/10/russian-political-parties-in-1905.pdf


http://www.wavcott.org.uk/revisionsite/history/russiafactions.html
	Bolsheviks
	The Bolsheviks were the more hard-line wing of the Social Democratic party. They believed in fast change, and disliked the idea of working together with other parties or more centrist organisations. They split from the Mensheviks in 1903, and were led by Vladimir Lenin. They kept a much lower profile than the Mensheviks or SRs until 1917, when Lenin's personal charisma and the ruthless Bolshevik leadership managed to turn the situation to their advantage and gain military power. They managed to re-split the Mensheviks, gaining members such as Alexandra Kollontai and Leon Trotsky, and later took control of the government, becoming the core of the governance of Communist Russia under Lenin as (essentially) a dictator. 


a guess: the splits meant to filter out those not loyal to the Okhrana? (or "Holy Brotherhood" or whatever you want to call them.)

	...Mensheviks
	The Mensheviks were the slightly less hardline of the Social Democrat factions. They believed in a gradual transition towards a socialist state, and were more positive about democracy and working with the Kadets and SRs than Lenin's Bolshevik faction. Led by Julius Martov, they played a major role in the transitional governments of 1917, supporting Kerensky. Later that year they split again with some members returning to join the Bolshevik faction.

	...Socialist Revolutionaries
	The Socialist Revolutionaries were the main socialist faction in Russia from 1900 to 1917. Their radical stance on reform, redistributing land to the peasants and removing the Tsar, made them very popular with the peasantry. The SRs were also violent at times, sometimes killing 500 or so people in a year for being opposed to their cause. The SRs were a major faction in the transitional government and won the elections of 1917 with huge peasant support. The Bolsheviks, who had taken power from the transitional government a few days earlier, shut the SRs out and dissolved the assembly. The right of the SRs supported the whites in the civil war, the left supported the reds; others supported neither side. SRs included Alexander Kerensky and Victor Chernov.



------


Fontanka book:


	...With great zest for his work, Beletsky plunged into matters that
previous directors preferred to avoid. He personally controlled the
most important secret agents, went forth into the streets of Petersburg
to meet with informers and agents in conspiratorial apartments, and
dictated instructions to them. Having studied all the fine points of the
revolutionary underground, and being personally acquainted with the
leaders of the main parties, Beletsky employed the ancient principle of
divide and conquer. He staked a great deal on exploiting the schism
between the Bolsheviks and the Mensheviks, although subsequent
development showed that isolating the Bolshevik party had a quite
different result to the one the director of the Department of Police
anticipated.

	Beletsky's Malinovsky operation was the result of the Okhranka's
policy to widen the divisions in the Russian Social Democratic Workers'
party and thereby weaken its ability to lead the opposition against the
government. By 1910 the Okhranka believed that it had broken the
terrorist wing of the Socialist Revolutionary party. The secret agency
had made possible this triumph and Beletsky in 1912 came up with
the idea of using the method of infiltration - which had been success-
ful against the illegal SRS - against the Social Democrats operatin
within a legal organization, the State Duma. His chosen agent would
be Roman Malinovsky.

	Malinovsky, a Russified Pole, had a criminal record. He had served
a prison term for burglary from 1899 to 1902, and, upon release, had
joined the workers' movement and risen rapidly through its ranks. He
became a founder of the St Petersburg Metal Workers' Union and, in
1907, its secretary. Malinovsky attracted a following among the work-
ers because of his fiery speaking style and bold attacks against the
government. He was one of those figures in the early twentieth century
who sensed the influence of the masses, developed the qualities of a
spell-binding orator, and knew how to sway the thinking of a large
audience.


	Following his term in jail, Malinovsky joined another organization,
the Okhranka. Okhranka agents knew a lot about him and told him
that they understood that he was hardly a believing revolutionary, but
rather a tribune of the people who sought acclaim. Beletsky planned
to further Malinovsky's true ambition for public attention and influ-
ence. After a period of reflection, Malinovsky agreed to serve as a
secret agent. 16 His rise as police agent paralleled his upward climb in
the Metal Workers' Union. The value of his reports soon vaulted
Malinovsky to the status of a privileged agent. He was permitted to
inform on his comrades directly by telephone rather than at meetings
in conspiratorial apartments. The Okhranka had so much confidence
in him that it did not subject him to the periodic psychological assess-
ments that controlling officers undertook during a debriefing. The
Okhranka scrupulously protected Malinovsky and carried out the
arrests of those he denounced with great care in order to avoid com-
promising him. Eventually, to protect his connection with the St Peters-
burg Okhranka, the police exiled him from the city to avoid exposure.


	...The
Okhranka came up with a fresh idea for the use of its agent: Mali-
novsky was to run for election to a deputy's seat in the State Duma
as a representative of a workers' curia in Moscow; the Okhranka
intended to make certain that he won the election. Beletsky says that
A.P. Martynov, the new chief of the Moscow Okhranka, first raised
the idea with him in 1912 as the elections approached for the Fourth
State Duma. A.T. Vassilyev, who would later be the last chief of the
Okhranka, said that this "trifling affair" was entirely the idea of
Beletsky. 19
No matter who thought of the idea, Beletsky liked it; but, before
going ahead, he first sought approval from his superiors: "I spoke by
telephone with Zoltarev [vice-minister of the interior].


what, is rigging elections supposed to be a groundbreaking idea for them?

seems off


------

https://books.google.com/books?id=V3IeAQAAMAAJ&pg=PA418&lpg=PA418
	New Lights on the Russian Revolution

	June 14, 1919

	...Mr. Spargo traces the intricate history of the Russian revolutionary parties and shows how the Socialists in 1902 slit in two, the majojrity (Bolsheveki) following Lenin, and the minority (Mensheviki) following Plechanov. At first the Bolsheviki were nurst by the Czar, later by the Kaiser. The most violent of the Bolshevik leaders in the Duma, Malinovsky, a close friend of Lenin, turned out to be a police spy and *provocateur*, and his fiery speeches attacking the Government and the bourgeoisie were written for him by Beletzky of the Police Department.

	...Ambassador Francis told her that he had offered American troops to Kerensky but the offer was declined as unnecessary. It has been ah rd to understand the actions of the Russian GOvernment previous to the revolution, but it is all explained when we hear that this policy was dictated to Minister Protopopov by the ghost of the murdered Rasputin. Princes Cantacuzene confirms that rumor that the revolution retarded the withdrawal of Russia from the war, for Premir Sturmer was about to make peace with Germany when he was overthrown.

	...The charge that the Bolshevik movement was secretly encouraged by the Russian Government before the war is confirmed by Serge Persky in the latest volume of his journalistic articles, From Nicholas II to Lenin. He has a photograph of notes of a speech delivered by Malinovsky in the Duma which had been OK'd and annotated by the Minister Maarof. Pravda ("Truth"), the official organ of the Bolshevists, was subsidzed by the Okhrana (secret politce), and Lenin himself in 1910 or 1911 had relations with them. When this was exposed Lenin defended himself in the same fashion as when charged with receiving German aid:

		It was not eh Okhrana that made use of us but on the contrary we that made use of the Okhrana. Without doubt the Okhrana has rendered great services to our party without ever obtaining anything from us.


so this says Beletzky wrote Malinovsky's speeches


https://archive.org/stream/fallofthedynasti012755mbp/fallofthedynasti012755mbp_djvu.txt
	A senior police official 
named Stephen Beletsky, who for a while was one of the key figures in the 
band, put Rasputin on the secret payroll of the Okhrana for a salary of 
3000 rubles a month about $800 and with the Czarina's authorization 
assigned an Okhrana general to supervise the starets* personal bodyguard. 


And Beletsky put Rasputin on the Okhrana's payroll


https://books.google.com/books?id=6BAWCgAAQBAJ&pg=PA209#v=onepage&q&f=false
    Upon assuming the directorship of Fontanka, Beletskii ordered a massive penetration of Russian society by his field bureaus especially among the peasantry, railway workers, high school students and Russia's military and naval forces 'without delay' ...Like Plehve, he wished no nook nor cranny of possible dissent to escape his attention. However, Beletskii was not satisfied with simply spying on society, he wanted to control it as well. The relationship between public opinion (the Duma and the press) and the workers' movement became the focus of Beletskii's experiment in social control.


this says Beletsky ordered the Okhrana to put penetration agents everywhere, but it seems like they were doing that earlier

	...Fontanka devised a stategy to manipulate the Bolshevik movement into disrupting moderate social democracy. Bolshevism by its very nature offered the perfect vehicle for this strategy. Historians have noted that the decision to adopt this strategy was a grossly ill-considered one. After all what did Beletskii and the Special Section accomplish? As Laura Engelstein and Victoria Bonnell (among others) have pointed out, Fontanka's strategy ensured the demise of moderate social democracy in Russia by producing frustration and anger amongst young workers, the potential leaders of their class. Beletskii's strategy drove these young men and women into the arms of the radical intelligentsia, who promised that by rejecting moderation in favour of extremism the workers would attain the economic and political goals they so desired. The end result contributed, therefore, to placing Lenin and his Bolsheviks at the forefront of the labour movement.


also says Beletsky had the strategy of promoting the Bolsheviks


------

https://books.google.com/books?id=0FIWCgAAQBAJ&pg=PA331&lpg=PA331&dq=Beletsky+Malinovsky+Duma&source=bl&ots=B_COAwEf9d&sig=g-IXsCeKhy9Ch1BA3cXWq85DoNw&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwimzfz2heDWAhXDQSYKHYScCqsQ6AEIOjAE#v=onepage&q=Beletsky%20Malinovsky%20Duma&f=false


After consulting with Beletsky, Malinovsky's criminal record was expunged so he could run for Duma. The Okhrana also arrested his rival candidates.

Chernomasov also started spreading rumors that Malinovksy was an Okhrana agent, which is interesting since Chernomasov was an Okhrana agent

Malinovksy also loaned money to Lenin

claims Lenin was compromised by Malinovsky

Then Malinovsky suddenly resigns the Duma May 8 1914 after they give him a bunch of money

then he got imprisoned by the Germans



------


from Beletsky's hearings:



https://translate.googleusercontent.com/translate_c?depth=1&hl=en&prev=search&rurl=translate.google.com&sl=ru&sp=nmt4&u=https://ru.wikisource.org/wiki/%25D0%259F%25D0%25B0%25D0%25B4%25D0%25B5%25D0%25BD%25D0%25B8%25D0%25B5_%25D1%2586%25D0%25B0%25D1%2580%25D1%2581%25D0%25BA%25D0%25BE%25D0%25B3%25D0%25BE_%25D1%2580%25D0%25B5%25D0%25B6%25D0%25B8%25D0%25BC%25D0%25B0._%25D0%25A2%25D0%25BE%25D0%25BC_3/%25D0%2594%25D0%25BE%25D0%25BF%25D1%2580%25D0%25BE%25D1%2581_%25D0%25A1._%25D0%259F._%25D0%2591%25D0%25B5%25D0%25BB%25D0%25B5%25D1%2586%25D0%25BA%25D0%25BE%25D0%25B3%25D0%25BE_12_%25D0%259C%25D0%25B0%25D1%258F_1917&usg=ALkJrhhquDEasgwum_-wrH6aZvzf5FlRpA
Chairman. - You again dodge. This is what I'm talking about.

Beletsky. - What I am reporting, I confirm; you see that I do not shy away from the truth. - A certain period of time passed, which enabled Malinovsky to make amends. In the party environment, it is a fairly large figure. He is a gifted and capable person. I and Vissarionov had a meeting with him and knew in this way what wishes are coming from the Bolshevik Party, which we had a lot among the Social-Democratic Party; Malinovsky's information enabled the police department to check information [ 281 ] foreign agents; then - give informative reports on the guiding principles of the future work of these parties; then, through it, break up what could somehow disturb the government. He treated with such confidence that some of the letters he gave to the police department in copies gave us the opportunity to know about the tasks of the party. Finally, he was sent to Switzerland by the faction, to the party congress. If you remember, it was a big congress of Bolshevik and Menshevik organizations, its task was to merge propaganda for common work. Malinovsky was instructed that he, if possible, contribute to the division of parties. They used it to know what was happening among the anarchists, among the Social Democrats, and not only in the Bolshevik party, but also in the Mensheviks, because these parties were somehow connected; for the Minister of Internal Affairs, this information is of great importance.

Chairman. "So you and Vissarionov had meetings with Malinovsky, according to instructions, in a safe house?"

Beletsky. - The meetings took place in different places. At a secret apartment, rarely, they were arranged for an official Kurochkin. And we met with Malinovsky in different places, so as not to pay attention; in separate rooms of the restaurant, etc.

Oldenburg. - Tell me, did it occur to the police department that holding a high state institution, such as the State Duma, a state criminal belonging to the Bolshevik party, a person with a tainted past, is an act of provocation?

Beletsky. - I myself said about Malinovsky, without waiting for your question. I considered myself guilty of what happened.

Chairman. - Do you think this is a provocation?

Beletsky. "I consider myself guilty." I'm aware, because it always reproached me. 



so "Malinovsky was instructed that he, if possible, contribute to the division of parties." How exactly did that happen? should look at what he actually did


Chairman. - Ie. has the right to supply the printing house only with the permission of the leading officers? The state in the community, as you know, being a lawyer, is a crime from the point of view of the law. Even passive state, for example, silent participation in meetings, is a sign of belonging to the community. This is the common interpretation. Eighth paragraph statement says, "but if you want something else to do, then do it with the approval in each case of the governing officer."

Beletsky.- But the governing officer he would not give this permission, since he had instructions from the Police Department, that such cases are cases of provocation. For example, we had an employee Malinovsky, a member of the State Duma. Performances you yourself know it well. Belonging to the Bolshevik Party, he was distinguished oratorical talent and represent quite a large figure. On his orders were placed - to speak from the pulpit of the State Duma. What he has to say from the pulpit of the Duma, from the point of view of the party? The party can give him directions; but he who is watching, can indicate that it did not have the character of what we call a provocation.

Chairman.- I've even do not understand anything. You, as the director of the Police Department, you know that Malinowski speech from the pulpit of the State Duma were the performances are very extreme, very high propaganda pressure. Malinowski, a secret agent of the police department, urged the country to revolution. Specify in this example, that you have taken yourself, what is the impact of those they lead?

Beletsky. - If you read Malinowski speech verbatim record, you will see that it is up to the last limit, before being called up, he never reached.

Chairman. - Do you think that can be even more extreme?

Beletsky. - From the point of view of the party, at the very moment when those requirements, which came from the Central Committee, he had to play a big role. [ 278 ]

Chairman. - Do you take the courage to assert that the role of its leader was moderating?

Beletsky. - Of course I do.

Chairman. - Was it desirable for the police department that a person should follow the revolutionary hierarchy, that he would rise higher and higher, to the center of the revolutionary party?

Beletsky. - In terms of only awareness.

Chairman. - You know that in order to move in this hierarchy, you need to have well-known merits before the party. So, from your point of view, the employee was the more valuable, the more he had merits before the party, the closer he stood to the center?

Beletsky. - Of course. 



Beletsky edited, censored Malinovksy's speeches, but Malinovksy called for revolution. Beletsky apparently claims that he just wanted Malinovksy to gain street cred with the Bolsheviks and that he didn't encourage Malinovsky to call for revolution.



Ivanov. - Do you know whether Malinovsky's speech was censored in the State Duma?

Beletsky. - I reported that the speech was composed by the party, and he was given. We looked through it, and if it did not answer our direction, it was agitational and exciting, we discussed the question whether it is possible for him to speak or not. The party can confirm that there have been cases when he refused. [ 286 ]

Chairman. "So, the speeches he pronounced went through censorship?"

Beletsky. - Sometimes, he was presented with requests, and he had to answer from himself, in addition to instructions. But, in most cases, the content of the speeches, especially on the budget, was known.

Chairman. "Was your order to Malinovsky to separate the single faction of the Social-Democrats?"

Beletsky. "I confess that the whole task of my leadership was to prevent the Party from joining up." I acted on the principle of " divide et impera ". [1] 



says he was big on splitting the Social Democrats



Schegolev. - You mentioned that the Bolshevik current had agents in Moscow and Petrograd.

Beletsky. - The regional agency was especially in Moscow and Petrograd. In Petrograd there were leading circles. Party of Social-Democrats. in my time was very good, that's why Malinowski was important to us in terms of broad, general, managerial coverage. In general, the Social-Democratic party. was covered by agents or investigative agencies of the Department quite widely. In the party s.-r. it was hardest to penetrate; she had the least number of good employees, so she was lightly and abroad, because there was a police officer of the department and Burtsev, who exposed us, beat us with our weapons very often; To translate abroad one of the local leaders was very difficult; The party was conspiratorial, the least of which were in communication with each other; Party correspondence did not come across very much, but the parties of the Social-Democrats. and the Cadets. they wrote a lot, and their correspondence did not escape the search authorities. 



Beletsky says Social Democrat were easier to infiltrate


------


https://archive.org/stream/in.ernet.dli.2015.276141/2015.276141.Three-Who_djvu.txt
	As always, to Lenin a gain for the faction was equivalent to a 
gain for “our Party” and for “the revolution.” Whether he was right 
in calculating that the split in the Duma was a gain, or whether the 
police were right in thinking it a loss to the revolutionary move- 
ment, we must leave to the reader to decide as he considers the 
events of the year 1917.

	...Information received from political agents points to a 
tendency recently exhibited within the ranks of the Russian 
Social Democratic Party toward the unification of the differ- 
ent factions ... In view of the exceptional gravity of this 
intention and the undesirabilify of its taking place, the 
Police Department considers it necessary to . . . impress 
upon their secret agents the necessity for participating in 
the various Party conferences, there to insist, firmly and 
convincingly, upon the utter impossibility of any such 
fusion, particularly the fusion of the Rolsheviki and the 
Mensheviki. [Russian text in Rabochaya Gazeta , April, 1917; 
English text in Kerensky: The Crucifixion of Liberty , John 
Day, 1934, p. 246; also in Gankin and Fisher: The Bolshe- 
viks and the World War , Stanford University Press, 1940, p. 106.] 



------

https://translate.googleusercontent.com/translate_c?depth=1&hl=en&prev=search&rurl=translate.google.com&sl=ru&sp=nmt4&u=https://ru.wikisource.org/wiki/%25D0%259F%25D0%25B0%25D0%25B4%25D0%25B5%25D0%25BD%25D0%25B8%25D0%25B5_%25D1%2586%25D0%25B0%25D1%2580%25D1%2581%25D0%25BA%25D0%25BE%25D0%25B3%25D0%25BE_%25D1%2580%25D0%25B5%25D0%25B6%25D0%25B8%25D0%25BC%25D0%25B0._%25D0%25A2%25D0%25BE%25D0%25BC_3/%25D0%2594%25D0%25BE%25D0%25BF%25D1%2580%25D0%25BE%25D1%2581_%25D0%25A1._%25D0%259F._%25D0%2591%25D0%25B5%25D0%25BB%25D0%25B5%25D1%2586%25D0%25BA%25D0%25BE%25D0%25B3%25D0%25BE_15_%25D0%259C%25D0%25B0%25D1%258F_1917&usg=ALkJrhj8iYcXsirvuVQtPPIBddwXmL_Wog


Chairman. - In a year more extreme members of the party were planted in the dock. We are interested in the opposite situation, in connection with the Malinovsky case.

Beletsky. - From the affairs of the police department you will see that we, as practitioners, were more interested not in the ideology of which the Menshevik organizations were representatives, but those who exercised; We were interested in the Bolshevik Party and its tasks; if they sometimes came across such cases, then this accident was; I will not say that it was a system. No, my only desire was not to allow these two currents to unite in one


I think Beletsky is claiming he didn't care about what his agents of influence were saying, only that the Bolsheviks and Mensheviks split


------


http://spartacus-educational.com/RUSokhrana.htm
	The Okhrana also recruited members of illegal organization. as paid informers. In 1912 over 26,000 people in Russia were receiving money from the Okhrana. The average informer received 100 rubles a month, a sum that was well above the average industrial wage at the time. Evno Azef, Okhrana's leading undercover agent, was paid over 2000 rubles a month.



maybe better to focus on scope, how they think/operate and what their known agents did


------

https://books.google.com/books?id=BfFCAAAAIAAJ&q=Burtsev+struggle+for+a+free+Russia&dq=Burtsev+struggle+for+a+free+Russia&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwj-1vKjo-LWAhVI4SYKHZxKDQgQ6AEILDAB

Okhrana bibliography



------


http://www.express.co.uk/news/world-war-1/460036/The-war-that-created-Russia-s-bloody-revolution
	By John Lewis-Stempel

	...Alas for Nicholas II, he did not inherit his father's iron will or his political shrewdness. Nicholas II preferred (and this is almost endearing) to play happy families rather than attend to affairs of the police state. When he was at his desk, his indecision was final. His impressionability was legendary. The most powerful man in Russia, the joke had it, was the last man to have spoken to the Tsar.


Nicolas II = Donald Trump?


	Make that the "last woman". He was under the thumb of his wife, Alexandra, who hailed from the insignificant German duchy of Hesse-Darmstadt. Her new position as Empress of all Russians went to her head. Writing in 1905 she opined: "The emperor, unfortunately, is weak, but I am not and I intend to be firm." The Lady Macbeth of Russia encouraged her husband's worst trait: His belief in a God-given right to rule.


wife gave him bad advice?


	...A Socialist Revolutionary of this persuasion threw a bomb into Plevhe's carriage. Almost his dying advice was: "What we need to hold Russia back from revolution is a small, victorious war." Russia got its war.

	It provoked a conflict with Japan over who controlled Manchuria. The Russo-Japanese War 1904-5 was relatively small, although it was anything but victorious for St Petersburg. Nicholas II called the Japanese "makaki", meaning monkeys. They made a monkey out of him, annihilating the Imperial navy at Tsushima.


what's going on here



------


https://archive.org/stream/in.ernet.dli.2015.276141/2015.276141.Three-Who_djvu.txt
	..."At that time there was not a single local organization into which some provocateur had not crept. Every man regarded his comrade with suspicion, was on his guard against those nearest to him, did not trust his neighbor." — G. Zinoviev


Okhrana had lots of agents in Russian revolution


	...If we were to list only the more important spies that had so far entered intimately into the life of Vladimir Ilyich, that list would include Gurovich, who financed the first legal Marxist organ, Nachalo , with police funds; the surgeon dentist N. N. Mikhailov, who turned in Ulyanov, Martov and the other organizers of the underground League for Struggle at the end of 1895; Dr. Jacob Zhitomirsky, who, as Lenin’s confidential agent in Berlin, made the arrangements for Kamo and his case of dynamite, for Krassin’s counterfeit banknote paper, and for Litvinov’s and other arrests in connection with the disposal of the five-hundred-ruble notes of the Tiflis holdup. So well did he work that Lenin continued to consider him as a “man of confidence,” to be used for the most delicate tasks. After the Berlin arrests, Zhitomirsky moved “for safety” to France, whence he visited Geneva in 1909 to urge Vladimir Ilyich to move to Paris, “a large city where there will be less spying.” Writes Krupskaya: “The argument was convincing to Ilyich.” Thus the shadowed moved in order to be closer to his shadow. 


Wolfe lists some important Okhrana agents in the Bolsheviks. Lenin moved to be closer to Zhitomirsky after the Tiflis holdup



	In 1911, Zhitomirsky finally fell under suspicion, but it was not his chief who suspected him. Lenin received a warning from Vladimir Burtsev. Now warnings from Burtsev were no small matter, for he was a self-constituted, one-man, counter-espionage agency. As some collect coins or stamps orieminine conquests, he collected spies. He it was who had shortly before exposed the incomparable Azev, director of the Fighting Section of the Social Revolutionary Party. Yet so sure was Lenin of his most trusted agent that he ignored the warning. 

	A revolutionary bloodhound by vocation, Burtsev, once he had scented a spy, was not to be put off the trail. By 1913 he had gathered so much evidence that he sent Lenin an ultimatum. He would create a public scandal if trust were not withdrawn from this man. “If my charges are false, let him haul me before a revolutionary tribunal. There he will prove his innocence or I my charges.” 

	Alarmed at last, Lenin sent another “man of confidence” to take up the Zhitomirsky matter with Burtsev, and, at the same time, to discuss the whole problem of combatting the spies with which the Bolshevik movement was now obviously infested. The man whom Lenin sent was Roman Malinovsky! 

	Malinovsky questioned Burtsev with strained interest. Who in the police or the government was giving him his secret tips? what reasons had he for suspecting Dr. Zhitomirsky? how could the Bolsheviks judge the reliability of such grave charges unless they were given the sources? what other Bolsheviks did he suspect? Insistently, Malinovsky pleaded that Burtsev communicate “in strict confidence” his sources in the government.



Lenin sends Malinovsky, an Okhrana agent, to handle the case of Zhitomirsky being an Okhrana agent