
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Revolutions_of_1917%E2%80%931923
	The Revolutions of 1917–1923 were a period of political unrest and revolts around the world inspired by the success of the Russian Revolution and the disorder created by the aftermath of World War I. The uprisings were mainly socialist or anti-colonial in nature and were mostly short-lived, failing to have a long-term impact.[1] Out of all the revolutionary activity of the era, the revolutionary wave of 1917–1923 mainly refers to the unrest caused by World War I in Europe.[2]


------


http://alphahistory.com/worldwar1/opposition-to-the-war/
	The Industrial Workers of the World (IWW, colloquially known as the ‘Wobblies’) was at the forefront of the anti-war movement in the United States, and to a lesser extent in Australia. An international union, the IWW was formed in America in 1906; by 1914 it had more than 10,000 members. As the chances of American involvement became more likely by late 1916, the IWW leadership became more vocal, arguing that the conflict was an ‘imperialist war’, fought to benefit land-hungry governments and profit-hungry industrialists. After the US formally entered the war in April 1917 the IWW and its members were targeted in government crackdowns, raids and arrests. Mobs occasionally enacted their own vigilante justice: in August 1917 IWW executive member Frank Little was lynched from a railroad bridge. In Australia the IWW had barely a few hundred members, yet IWW members were instrumental in forming the Anti-Conscription League which engineered the defeat of the 1916 plebiscite. The response from Australian prime minister Billy Hughes was to declare the IWW an ‘unlawful association’ and have more than a hundred of its members rounded up, arrested and sentenced to prison.



IWW at forefront of anti-war movement in US and to a lesser extent Austrailia

ILP led anti-war movement in Britain

socialists also targetted women's rights groups using anti-war sentiment

initial upsurge of patriotism at start of war

not spelled out in this article, but it looks like there was a split early on between socialists controlling the anti-war movement and the rest (I guess especially the right, as in Germany) being "pro-war" or at least more nationalistic. As the war went on the socialist anti-war groups grew in power.


Besides this, there was Luxemberg and spartacus league in France, Conscription Crisis in Ireland, army Mutinees of 1917 in france.

It looks like British constripction for unpopular war in the colonies also strained the relationship between Britain and British colonies 



------


http://ic.galegroup.com/ic/whic/ReferenceDetailsPage/ReferenceDetailsWindow?failOverType=&query=&prodId=&windowstate=normal&contentModules=&display-query=&mode=view&displayGroupName=Reference&dviSelectedPage=&limiter=&currPage=&disableHighlighting=&displayGroups=&sortBy=&zid=&search_within_results=&p=UHIC&action=e&catId=&activityType=&scanId=&documentId=GALE%7CCX3427300239&source=Bookmark&u=imgacademy&jsid=59e7d86be9c96b6a18661edfc4f165ac
	Opponents of World War I included radicals, pacifists, social gospel clergymen, social workers, feminist women, labor lawyers, liberal publishers, university professors, public school teachers, isolationists, and some German Americans. Opponents of U.S. intervention organized against President Wilson's preparedness campaign (1915–1917); after the United States entered the war in April 1917, many opponents continued to express antiwar dissent. Radicals, including socialists, anarchists, and syndicalists, argued that capitalism, imperialism, and the competition for markets caused the war. The Socialist Party of America (SP) and the Industrial Workers of the World (IWW) were the most important radical groups to oppose the war and the draft. In April 1917, the SP condemned the war, opposed American intervention, and vowed support for "all mass movements" against conscription. The IWW, a revolutionary industrial union opposed to capitalism and militarism whose members were known as Wobblies, led wartime strikes that disrupted wartime production. Individual radicals also opposed the war, including anarchists Emma Goldman and Alexander Berkman, who formed the No-Conscription League, which prompted their arrest.



radical socialists, anarchists argued "imperialist war" caused by capitalism. Wanted to support "mass movements" agains conscription (something similar to Vietnam anti-war movement?). IWW led wartime strikes that "disrupted wartime production." Anarchist Emma Goldman (involved in McKinley assassination) also joined anti-war effort.


------


in Germany and Russia, pattern of socialist growing in power, especially after end of the war. Clearly socialism grew in power in Russia, and in Germany the German revolution was said to have been backed by socialists. In America, the IWW became powerful enough to help launch the first "red scare" of 1919.

The SPD established the Wiemar republic, but failed to root out the Foreign Ministry after the revolution


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/German_Revolution_of_1918%E2%80%9319
	The revolutionaries, inspired by socialist ideas, did not hand over power to Soviet-style councils as the Bolsheviks had done in Russia, because the leadership of the Social Democratic Party of Germany (SPD) opposed their creation. The SPD opted instead for a national assembly that would form the basis for a parliamentary system of government.[1] Fearing an all-out civil war in Germany between militant workers and reactionary conservatives, the SPD did not plan to strip the old German upper classes completely of their power and privileges. Instead, it sought to integrate them into the new social democratic system. In this endeavour, SPD leftists sought an alliance with the German Supreme Command. This allowed the army and the Freikorps (nationalist militias) to quell the communist Spartacist uprising of 4–15 January 1919 by force. The same alliance of political forces succeeded in suppressing uprisings of the left in other parts of Germany, with the result that the country was completely pacified by late 1919.


the German revolution of 1918-19 was followed by a failed communist uprising in 1919


	...At the European congresses of the second Socialist International, the SPD had always agreed to resolutions asking for combined action of Socialists in case of a war. Following the assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand in Sarajevo, the SPD, like other socialist parties in Europe, organised anti-war demonstrations during the July Crisis. After Rosa Luxemburg called for disobedience and rejection of war in the name of the entire party as a representative of the left wing of the party, the Imperial government planned to arrest the party leaders immediately at the onset of war. Friedrich Ebert, one of the two party leaders since 1913, travelled to Zürich with Otto Braun to save the party's funds from being confiscated.


In Germany, socialists and Rosa Luxemburg organized anti-war demonstrations as early as the July Crisis

majority of SPD newspapers supported the war at beginning


first organized strikes in armament factories happened in Germany after February revolution of 1917 in Russia. Ludendorffs policies likely fueled resentment of workers


as war resentment rose, the SDP was sharply split into those who supported and those who opposed the war


the SPD under Ebert expelled opponents to the war, who joined up with Spartacists, Centrists, and others to oppose the war. They formed the USPD party.


the sailors revolt was triggered by German admirals deciding to go fight the British navy without authorization as the war was coming to a close (after Ludendorff declared war lost). This event is said to have sparked the German Revolution. 


wikipedia article a bit off? talking about sailors "comrades" and raising "slogans" of peace and bread, "spontaneous demonstrations"


police were ordered to fire on protestors after the Keil mutiny


the spartacists wanted to establish a socialist (soviet-style?) republic and abolish the death penatly, but someone else beat them to it and established a less-soviet-like socialist republic

what exactly was going on here? did the Bolsheviks not get their way? wanting to abolish the death penatly makes them sound nervous


	...As in the previous November, almost[weasel words] spontaneously[according to whom?], a second revolutionary wave developed


lol


http://spartacus-educational.com/GERrevolution.htm

maybe this article better


After Spartacus rebellion, Liebknecht and Luxemburg were killed by proto-Nazis


------


did socialists in other countries act to channel anti-war sentiment to further their cause and if so, how?


clear in Russia: Bolsheviks told people the war was caused by greedy capitalists, and so argued that the war could be stopped by establishing a communist government

In Germany, anger at Admirals continuting the unpopular war sparked a revolution

In U.S., IWW argued the war was imperialist and caused by capitalists


governments in these countries would crack-down on anti-war protestors calling for strikes in armament factories, dodging conscription, or mutiny in the army. This would galvanize workers in these countries and help them believe a greedy capitalist government was acting to keep them subjugated. Governments might be more inclined to panic and crack-down thinking strikes or draft-doding or mutiny would cause them to lose the war.



https://www.marxists.org/subject/germany-1918-23/hippe/ch01.htm
	The Spartacus League appeared irregularly throughout 1917 and 1918. These Letters gave us news of national and international developments. They were a great help to us in our anti-war agitation. Karl Liebknecht and Rosa Luxemburg, who had both been in prison for a long time, were able, with the help of warders or of comrades who visited them, to smuggle out political documents, and were, in their turn, supplied with material from outside. The outbreak of the February Revolution in Russia was an event which gave new impetus to our struggle. We were particularly inspired by one of Rosa Luxemburg’s articles which she wrote in Wronke prison:

		‘The outbreak of the Russian Revolution has broken the deadlock in the historical situation which was caused by the continuation of the world war and the simultaneous failure of the proletarian class struggle ... The anxious expectation with which Germany receives every speech by Chkheidze or by the workers’ and soldiers’ council regarding questions of war and peace is tangible confirmation of the fact that . . . only the revolutionary actions of the proletariat offer a way out of this impasse of the world war . . . In any event, even with the greatest heroism, no proletariat of any single country can sever this noose. The Russian Revolution will grow unaided into an international problem . .


I guess Luxemburg was saying a communist revolution was the only way out of the world war, although that's not what this article is about



https://www.marxists.org/archive/luxemburg/1915/xx/theses.htm
	World peace cannot be assured by projects utopian or, at bottom, reactionary, such as tribunals of arbitration by capitalist diplomatists, diplomatic “disarmament” conventions, “the freedom of the seas,” abolition of the right of maritime arrest, “the United States of Europe,” a “customs union for central Europe,” buffer states, and other illusions. Imperialism, militarism and war can never be abolished nor attenuated so long as the capitalist class exercises, uncontested, its class hegemony. The sole means of successful resistance, and the only guarantee of the peace of the world, is the capacity for action and the revolutionary will of the international proletariat to hurl its full weight into the balance.


saying the same thing here

she also talks about how the socialist parties had supported the war

like Lenin she talks about an international socialist effort working together to seize power

this was written before Spartacus League formed in 1916


https://www.marxists.org/archive/luxemburg/1917/04/oldmole.htm
	The grudging respect of the German and Austro-Hungarian governments for the ‘cadgers and conspirators’ and the nervous tension with which our ruling classes receive every utterance by Cheidze and by the workers’ and soldiers’ soviet concerning the question of war and peace are now a tangible confirmation of the fact which only yesterday met the uncomprehending opposition of the socialists from the A.G. This was the fact that the way out of the blind alley of the world war led not through diplomatic ‘agreements’ and Wilsonian messages, but solely and exclusively through the revolutionary action of the proletariat. The victors at Tannenberg and Warsaw now tremblingly await their own ‘liberation’ from the choking noose of war by the Russian proletariat, by the ‘mob in the street’!

	Of course even with the greatest heroism the proletariat of one single country cannot loosen this noose. The Russian Revolution is growing of its own accord into an international problem. For the peace efforts of the Russian workers bring them into acute conflict not only with their own bourgeoisie, but also with the English, French and Italian bourgeoisie. The rumblings of the bourgeois press in all the Entente countries – The Times, Matin, Corriere della Sera, etc. – show that the capitalists of the West, these stout-hearted champions of ‘democracy’ and of the rights of the ‘small nations’, are watching, with gnashing teeth and hourly mounting rage, the advances made by the proletarian revolution that has checked the glorious era of the undivided rule of imperialism in Europe.


I think she's saying world revolutions of the "proletariat" will end the war and the "proletariat" in power in Russia will help the rest of the world, and capitalists and imperialists are nervous

------


http://www.ww1-propaganda-cards.com/karl_liebknecht_and_r.l.html
	Liebknecht and Rosa Luxemburg were captured by Freikorps soldiers, on 15 January 1919, with considerable support from Minister of Defense Gustav Noske, and brought to the Eden Hotel in Berlin, where they were tortured and interrogated for several hours. Following this, Luxemburg was beaten to death with rifle butts and thrown into a nearby river while Liebknecht was shot in the back of the head then deposited as an unknown body in a nearby mortuary.


were they actually killed?


------


Did IWW try to channel war into support for socialists, moscow?


https://www.marxists.org/archive/eastman/1921/bill-haywood.htm
	But something is happening. The long arm of the Moscow engineers is active in Chicago. Tired, discouraged, jail-worn and work-worn editors and organizers are talking about a new subject with a new enthusiasm — an enthusiasm that Bill Haywood describes as “quiet and warm.” The subject they are talking about is an endorsement of the International Council of Trade and Industrial Unions, affiliation with it, and the resolute fulfillment of its purposes in this country.

	“I would like to see a unanimous vote for affiliation on the part of the I.W.W.,” Bill Haywood said to me. “I only want to live to see the dream of the Red Labor International come true. That’s all I want. That’s the I.W.W.”

	He had in his pocket a leaflet written by an English delegate to the Council, J.T. Murphy. In that he showed me a footnote stating that the delegates had voted to draft an appeal to the I.W.W., and to other organizations of syndicalist tendency which had not yet declared for affiliation.

	“That got me,” he said. “To think of the workers of several nations, including one nation of a hundred and eighty million, causing the draft of an appeal to the I.W.W.! That shows what has happened to the world. I don’t have to wait for their appeal. I've read their plans and their instructions, and I know this is something at last that we can work with. They are carrying out the original aims and purposes of the I.W.W., and you can say for me that I think every genuine labor union in the United States ought to affiliate with the International Council of Trade and Industrial Unions with its central bureau at Moscow.”


Haywood said IWW should align with Russian Communists, but what did he say during the war?


there were IWW writings saying industrial sabotage would "keep the soldier home"


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bill_Haywood#Life_in_Soviet_Russia
	The Department of Justice, with the approval of President Woodrow Wilson, then proceeded to arrest 165 IWW members for "conspiring to hinder the draft, encourage desertion, and intimidate others in connection with labor disputes."


also this


so they acted against the war and got government to crack down on them, which is one way of using the war

anything else?


http://spartacus-educational.com/USAhaywood.htm
	Haywood and the Industrial Workers of the World opposed the United States becoming involved in the First World War. He issued a statement on behalf of the IWW: "With the European war for conquest and exploitation raging and destroying the lives, class consciousness and unity of the workers, clouding the main issues, we openly declare ourselves the determined opponents of all nationalistic sectionalism, or patriotism, and the militarism preached and supported by our one enemy, the capitalist class. We condemn all wars, and for the prevention of such, we proclaim the anti-militarist propaganda in time of peace and, in time of war, the General Strike in all industries."

	Haywood did not agitate against it nor forbid members to comply with the draft. Nevertheless, politicians and employers' associations attacked the IWW as disloyal and dangerous. In a series of raids resulted in the indictment of Haywood and most of the union's leadership under the Espionage Act. After a long trial in Chicago, Haywood was sentenced to a fine of $20,000 and twenty years' imprisonment.

http://spartacus-educational.com/USAiww.htm


Haywood and IWW opposed the war, but didn't agitate that much against it


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Industrial_Workers_of_the_World

IWW was prepared to agitate more against the war in the U.S., printed pamphlets and everything, but didn't go through with it. Haywood argued against it saying it would threaten IWW's existance, while Frank Little wanted more anti-war agitation. IWW's antiwar stance actually made them less popular in the U.S.


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/United_States_in_World_War_I#Public_opinion

the war wasn't as unpopular in the U.S. The U.S. economy wasn't devestated by the war, the Lusetania and unrestricted submarine warfare made Americans angry at Germany. Guessing channeling anti-war sentiment into support for socialist causes wouldn't have worked in America

Interesting that Henry Ford was anti war and even sent a ship for some kind of peace effort. Ford would later support the Nazis leading up to WW2.

There was also a "preparedness movement" advocating "realism" and emphasizing the U.S. military weakness while advocating for involement in the war. This was politicized with Repulicans for it and Democrats against it.

The war still drove some domestic unrest and atrocities in the U.S. The IWW pointed to "keeping the soldier home" to justify sabotage, and rumors of a German induced attempt to start uprising among Black Americans caused a wave of lynchings to occur in the United States.

George Creel led a pro-war propaganda campaign and even the boy scouts were involved in distributing war pamphlets.

------

What was extent of socialist campaigns in France and how, if they did, did they use the war?

There were some telegrams iirc in the German Foreign Ministry about spreading Bolshevik propaganda in France



------


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Biennio_Rosso
	The Biennio Rosso took place in a context of economic crisis at the end of the war, with high unemployment and political instability. It was characterized by mass strikes, worker manifestations as well as self-management experiments through land and factories occupations.[1] Tension had been rising since the final years of the war. Some contemporary observers considered Italy to be on the brink of a revolution by the end of 1918.

	The population was confronted with rising inflation and a significant increase in the price of basic goods, in a period that extensive unemployment was aggravated by mass demobilization of the Royal Italian Army at the end of the war. Association to the trade unions, the Italian Socialist Party (PSI), and the anarchist movement increased substantially. The PSI increased its membership to 250,000, and the major Socialist trade union, the General Confederation of Labour (Confederazione Generale del Lavoro, CGL), reached two million members, while the anarchist Italian Syndicalist Union (Unione Sindacale Italiana, USI) reached between 300,000 and 500,000 affiliates. The vigour of the anarchists was boosted by the return from exile of the anarchist leader Errico Malatesta.


Socialists also active in Italy following (during?) war, ended up with fascism as with Germany


https://encyclopedia.1914-1918-online.net/article/social_conflict_and_control_protest_and_repression_italy
	In the years 1914-1918, Italy was the scene of periodic waves of protest against the war. The particular form the exceptional conditions took, and the mobilization were the cause and effect of social conflicts of an intensity unparalleled in allied countries. Women played an important role in the movements which updated the content of the protests, shifting the objectives from the local to the national or supranational dimension. Opposition to military intervention became the common feature of the struggles which had arisen for different reasons and which tended to coalesce in protest against the policy of civilian, rationing, industrial mobilization, and in the demands for land and work, without being able to unite politically.


Italy had "waves of protest" against the war, and the intensity of unrest was unusually high compared to other countries. The protest took on an international dimension.

this article is mostly garbage

some major events:



Caporetto, Battle of - worst Italian defeat, October 1917

August Turin riots


https://www.britannica.com/place/Italy/World-War-I-and-fascism

a lot going on, anti-war and pro-war protests in Italy during WW1

Italian leadership joined war for imperialist reasons, a new government decided to stick with the secret "London agreement" and keep Italy in the war against wishes of the public. The war was very unpopular:

	The war was deeply unpopular both among the troops—mostly conscripted peasants who were undernourished and fighting for a cause few could understand—and among the civilian population back home, which included almost one million workers in arms factories who were also subject to military discipline. Many rebelled within the army. (It has been estimated that some 470,000 conscripts resisted call-up, 310,000 committed acts of indiscipline under arms, and 300,000 deserted.) More than one million soldiers came before military tribunals before a postwar amnesty was granted. Many once again saw the Italian state only as a repressive institution. Antiwar disturbances struck Milan in May 1917, and serious bread riots took place among the industrial workers of Turin in August 1917. Troops occupied Turin and took four days to restore order; some 50 demonstrators and 10 soldiers were killed in the clashes.


socialists, peasants and workers were disgusted by the war, hated the Italian government and were inspired by the revolutions in Russia and Germany. Italian society was fractured among pro-war and anti-war lines.

Wilson's plan for peace involved Italy gaining less territory than the Entente promised, leading to resentment among some pro-war Italians.


	...The Socialist Party was dominated by its maximalist wing, a faction led by Giacinto Serrati that abandoned the Socialists’ prewar and wartime reformist policy for a more radical approach, and by the New Order (Ordine Nuovo) group of intellectuals based in Turin around Antonio Gramsci. These Socialists continually proclaimed the need for revolution and their desire to “do as in Russia.” Reformist leaders, such as Turati, were isolated and vilified. However, the party did little to actually prepare for revolution, and its working-class base, as well as most trade union leaders, remained largely moderate and reformist. 


some tried or called for a Russian-style socialist revolution, but they didn't do much to actually prepare for one


https://www.marxists.org/archive/lenin/works/1918/dec/04b.htm

Lenin asking Serrati to start a communist revolution? kindof weird letter


------

http://www.jstor.org/stable/41298687

pg 105

	...In Italy the economic and psychological strain of the war upon the population intensified throughout 1917 and reached its peak following the Bolshevik Revolution in Russia and the defeat of the Italian Army at Caporetto. Discontent over the war caused food riots, strikes and an increase in subversive activities so that by the end of the year the Italian Government feared a revolution.


says defeat at Caporetta led to "surge of patriotism" that helped keep the government together.


pg 105

government worried about what it saw as subversive groups: interventionalists, anarchists, Leninists and socialists. Interventionalists were some sort of proto-fascists and threatened a coup. The government weren't worried about Leninists as much, until after Carporetto they rejected a policy of not sabotaging the government and worked to promote a revolution. They grew even more concerned after Bolshevik revolution.

pg 106

In the military, there were many desertions (tens of thousands caught) and an attempted uprising in July 1917 where two infantry companies threatened to march on the command post at Udine.


	...After the government expressed some interest in Woodrow Wilson's proposal for "peace without victory" which he issued in a speech to the United States Senate on January 22, 1917, the interventionists began to suspect that King Victor Emmanuel and the cabinet had lost the will to fight. They feared that the king might soon offer an armistice himself. In order to prevent this they began to discuss the possible overthrow of the government and the formation of a military dictatorship. Such planning was treasonous and demonstrated that the interventionists comprised a greater threat to the nation than the anti-militarists and pacifists.


didn't the communists plot a revolution too? seems weired to insert in here that the interventionlists were a "greater threat than the anti-militarists."


pg 108

the interventionalists plotted to execute the king and install General Cadorna, according to a police informer--Bertrand might be right that interventionalists were a greater threat, despite weird way he said it

	...The Committee of Public Safety was serious business. Some members discussed plans to assassinate the king and other politicians who might thwart them


this does sound like serious business.

says Committee of Public Safety launched a propaganda campaign against anti-war demonstrations, calling them "subversive"

pg 109 -- too much assigning motive without backing up with facts. Might be right but writing style is off

pg 111 -- talks about Turin insurrection, food riots, general strike, but not much about who led it


https://books.google.com/books?id=jYdgAwAAQBAJ&pg=PT264
	...The example of the soviets encouraged radical industrial militants everywhere to see their local power as a means of pressing for peace. The most serious popular upheaval of the war in Italy, the insurrection in Turin in August 1917, was partly triggered by a visiting delegation from the Petrograd Soviet, greeted by 40,000 Turinese socialists and metalworkers crying, 'Long live the Russian Revolution, long live Lenin!' Although caused by bread shortages and bitter hostility over industrial discipline, the Turin rising rapidly adopted the demand for peace. In France, where the political culture of labour drew on a broad revolutionary tradition, the Russian Revolution strengthened the tendency for economic and political protest, including the demand for peace, to be expressed in revolutionary language and imagery. 'The Russian Revolution has occurred just when the peoples [of Europe] are weary of spilling their blood to satisfy the appetites of the Tsar, the Kaiser, and Poincare' declared the French socialist deputy and Kienthal signatory Pierre Brizon in March 1917. 'The revolutionaries will impose peace, which will bring the regeneration of humankind and abolish all frontiers.' Even in Britain, where the political culture of labour was generally anything but revolutionary, the prestige of the March (or February) Revolution gave a fillip to the yearning for peace. An extraordinary meeting of socialist opposition groups, held in Leeds in June 1917, called for the establishment of 'Councils of Workers and Soldiers' throughout the country.


also says Stockholm Conference was important. Even socialist parties opposed it with some claiming it would make their countries look weak


------

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Social_Democratic_Party_of_Austria#From_the_beginnings_until_1918

anti-war strikes also broke out in Austria


-----


Ottoman empire completely destroyed by WW1--how did it happen?

young turks, british intervention in Greece, other forces said to have made Ottomans more nationalistic. Did Ottomans decide it better to split up among their own nations? Supposedly, the Young Turks made the empire more Turkey-centric, maybe leading to resentment among other parts of the empire.


the Treaty of Sèvres signed by Central Powers after their defeat in World War I led to the partitioning of the Ottoman empire

the treaty was rejected, but the treaty of Lausanne was signed 3 years later


https://www.britannica.com/event/Sykes-Picot-Agreement

A secret agreement to carve up the Ottoman empire was made among Entente powers in May 1916, Sykes-Picot

The Soviets published the agreement along with other secret agreements of imperialist Russia. Arab countries were angered upon learning of the agreement.


------


http://socialistreview.org.uk/393/revolution-trenches
	Given the enormity of the casualties, the war might have been seen by most soldiers as an inescapable juggernaut of death. But as the trenches became almost a fixed feature of the war, soldiers on all sides began to choose to face it with a different attitude — to live and to avoid killing in order not to be killed. They began the practice that became known as “Live and let live”. The best known examples were those at the Christmas truce in 1914, but in-depth studies have shown and many memoirs have recorded that troops on both sides came to more and more frequent “‘live and let live” arrangements. The generals called it fraternisation and forbade it. Russian revolutionary leader Vladimir Lenin wrote that it was the instinctive response of oppressed people, tired, exhausted and losing confidence in capitalist promises. These arrangements were not motivated by clear-cut political ideas. The will to survive and to respect the enemy soldiers’ wish to do the same replaced ruling class exhortations to “Kill the Hun” or “Destroy the English”.

	It was the beginning of a gradual change of attitude among the frontline soldiers, that in the end came to predominate. It finally brought the war to an end in waves of draft dodging, desertions and voluntary surrenders, initially by the Russians, French and Italians in 1917, and from March to October 1918, by the Germans, Bulgarians and Austria-Hungarians. Germany’s defeat was presented by military historians as a hard fought struggle to the bitter end. In reality voluntary surrenders, desertions and mutinies foiled the generals’ plans. The revolutions that followed this mass disobedience brought down three European empires and the Ottoman Empire of the Turks. The “endemic live and let live” truces started the process of troops abandoning the war.


socialist review says decisive factor in war was troop morale an desertions, Germany had a wave of desertions before surrender


	The nearest example in more recent times was the resistance of American troops during the Vietnam War that contributed to the defeat of the US in 1975. At the beginning of the First World War it was the excessively high casualty rates in the big battles that accelerated the practice. In prolonged trench warfare troops developed ways of limiting casualties on both sides. By tacit agreement they organised some open and some covert semi-ritualised avoidance procedures. A sniper would punch holes in walls and not in people’s heads. The lone soldier or the group of gunners would deliberately aim high or time the morning barrage so precisely that their targets could be well out of the way. If the response from the enemy mirrored these practices a day of “live and let live” could be expected, and this would go on for weeks and months, with cunning variations to foil the officers. The senior officers detested it. But many junior officers, often from different class backgrounds than those higher up the chain of command, began to accept it and lived to record it in their memoirs. 



maybe insight into their thinking of how to use war to further socialism--you and enemy soldiers are forced to be there, war forced on you by officers, government, "elite"


	...Lenin argued that live and let live and draft dodging should not simply continue as the only possible way for individual soldiers to survive through to the peace, but that revolutionaries should set themselves the task of turning fraternisation and the will to survive into politically conscious movements to transfer power into the hands of the revolutionary proletariat.


e.g. "converting the imperialist war into a class struggle"?


	...Desertion took place on a massive scale in the Russian, Austrian and Italian armies. Around 400,000 Italian soldiers “walked home” from the battle of Caporetto in the autumn of 1917.


mass scale desertions in Russia, Austria, and Italy armies.


	When it was taken up by the French after the 1917 February Revolution in Russia, the Western powers looked to the US for replacements but it was only in the very last months of the war that these arrived at the front. Due to the influenza pandemic, those US troops who were fit and trained to fight amounted to very small numbers. Half of the 100,000 US fatalities died of flu.


what's going on here?


	In April 1917 when the Americans joined the war almost half the French army overstayed home leave, deserted or mutinied, often singing the Internationale in protest at the war’s continuation. Subsequently general Petain kept the mutineers out of any major battles for almost a year and regained their loyalty by meeting many of their demands for longer leave and better food. With the help of the French Social Democrats he was able to deflect the drive to revolution.


Do socialists (or at least this guy) claim the French army mutinees as a victory? Interesting I guess that this guy likes Petain (didn't he oversee executions and troops being shelled? would be one of those "burgioise" officers, right?)


	The same was not the case when the German soldiers and sailors decided to desert en masse and to surrender without a fight. No German general succeeded in driving them back into the trenches. A minority of suicidal machine gunners did not quit their posts and British troops died by the thousand after being ordered to walk in open ranks to attack their strong points.


should look into German desertions toward end of the war


	Hidden revolt

	As Lenin pointed out, it took a decade for an abundant supply of “adult ‘cannon-fodder’ to grow up”. The increased rate of “butchery” in the First World War shortened the time left to the generals. Gas warfare became general, and mechanised heavy guns, tanks, machine guns and fighter planes were produced in millions, raising the rate of slaughter fivefold, to the levels of those of 1914-15. In the final year German and Austrian generals went onto the offensive and the war of movement returned. Initially Ludendorff’s spring 1918 offensive was a success, driving the British and French back by up to 40 miles. It then petered out, in his own words “for want of 200,000 deserters” who Ludendorff claimed had failed to turn up to consolidate the ground gained in the attack. Many advancing troops had chosen instead to get drunk on the ample wine stocks they had captured.


did Lenin believe the war would cause the soldiers to "grow up" into socialism? According to this, Ludendorff believed his final pushed failed due to deserting German troops.


	Subsequent attacks by the Germans failed due to the drastically depleted ranks of their divisions. Draft dodging in Germany had become so common in 1917 that enrolment fell from 1.4 million to 0.6 million, a figure that reduced reserves for all the German armies and the size of its divisions at the front to the point where offensive battles were no longer possible. This marked the end of Ludendorff’s war plans. Many of the German relief divisions, having served in Russia in the run up to the Brest-Litovsk peace treaty, when fraternisation with the Russians had become common, sounded like Bolsheviks according to one top commander. Ten percent of the replacements jumped off the trains as they were transferred to the Western Front. Others had been sent to the front as punishment for going on strike in the munition factories. “Stay at home,” they shouted to the men they were replacing. The “hidden army strike” removed over a million troops from Germany’s field armies sent to defend its borders after the failure of the spring offensive.


draft dodging huge problem in Germany toward end of war, said have doomed Ludendorff's push. Claims germans in contact with Russian soldiers "sounded like Bolsheviks" and spread socialism in German ranks. Says there was a "hidden revolt" among Germany soldiers.

"Hidden revolt" became more open summer 1918, where german soldiers gave up, called-in sick or walked into allied prison camps following allied counter-offensive. "A third-of-a-million German front line soldiers deserted between July and November 1918."

I guess this is part of where "stab-in-the-back-myth" comes from? Ludendorff apparently blamed socialists for this. Maybe would also add to sting of Versailles--soldiers voluntarily surrender to allies only for them to turn around and wreck their country.


	...The hidden army revolt lacked any political organisation, though social democrats were the most likely to join it.


hmmm


	More drastic measures than calls for a negotiated peace were adopted. Desertion was taken up on a scale that amounted to defeatism, undertaken frequently by troops from the minority groups oppressed by the imperial regimes of Germany and Austria, such as Czechs, Poles, and Alsatians. Desertions took place during battles. Significant numbers went over to the enemy, giving away battle plans. Some 150,000 surrendered to th British.


soldiers became defeatist and some sabotaged their own war effort


 	In the final months of the war one in every two in the reserves failed to report for duty. Ludendorff himself became a deserter in late October and fled to Sweden. Some army generals and those commanding the navy and the air force called for national unity in one last ditch battle. They even considered bombing the trains that the deserters-turned-mutineers had commandeered to take them home. The Kaiser, Emperor Wilhelm II, supported the generals’ call for a desperate last stand. He and those preparing to attack their own workers and soldiers were over-ruled by the lower ranks of generals for fear of provoking a civil war in Germany. Without the support of his generals, the Kaiser abandoned his post. 



 half of reserves desert, some generals call for last stand, but decide not to over fear of starting a civil war.


 	In November 1918 sailors at Kiel naval port joined the mutiny and took over the town and the German Revolution had begun. The working class, in and out of uniform, were quitting the war and the war leaders were forced to call for an armistice. It was a year after mass desertions had begun and the Russian Revolution had brought the war in Eastern Europe to an end. Allied generals had not planned to end the war until July 1919, by which time a fully mobilised US army would be ready for a final onslaught. 


 So this was backdrop for German revolution. The soldiers propagandized and rightfully hating their governments in the field were highly experienced in combat, exposed to socialist ideas, emboldened in mutinous ideas and attitudes, and very very angry--an ideal setup for a socialist revolution.


 	French, German, Austrian and Russian soldiers had deserted and mutinied to end the war.


 look into Austrian desertions?



 	The question remains, why did not the British? There may be a very simple practical explanation. Troops in the other armies could take off their uniforms, get into civvies and walk off home or go into hiding. It was more difficult to do the same when you had to take a cross-channel ferry to desert or hide in a foreign country without knowing the language.


maybe another reason--British Empire often used as a foil to motivate socialist revolutions, for example


 	War historians quote the high British casualty rates in the last months to deny any organised surrender by the German troops. Others, such as Niall Ferguson, admit that mass surrenders took place on the battlefield, like throwing in the towel in the boxing ring to end the fighting. So contrary is this to received opinion that many historians find it hard to explain why this happened. One deserting soldier wrote a poem giving his reasons:

 		It’s all a Swindle:
		The War is for the Wealthy,
		The Middle Class must give way.
		The People provide the corpses. 


German soldier desertions disputed?


	After the Armistice desertions and mutinies spread to the British and empire troops who were demanding immediate demobilisation, preventing Lloyd George from sending troops to occupy all of Germany. “Germany”, he said, “was like a cholera area infected with the virus of Bolshevism. It would be most undesirable to march British miners into Westphalia if Westphalia was controlled by a Bolshevist organisation.” Such was the greatest fear of the French, British and American ruling class in 1918. Their war had ended not in outright victory. It had transformed Europe, east and west, into a cauldron of revolution.

	Today’s ruling class wants to commemorate a British victory. David Cameron and Michael Gove will not want us to be reminded of the desertions, mutinies and revolutions that brought the war to an end. Their main aim in commemorating the war is to keep alive the spirit of militarism. How the soldiers rebelled against it in 1914-18 will not be on the school curriculum.



------


https://encyclopedia.1914-1918-online.net/article/the_military_collapse_of_the_central_powers
	The Habsburg Army’s collapse accelerated during the first half of October 1918. Mutinies and severe discipline problems resulted from the prolonged political, social, and military events. War-weariness abounded. Entente propaganda proved particularly effective among the various Dual Monarchy nationalities. The citizenry had long since lost respect for its government because of its notoriously lackluster performance and divided Austrian and Hungarian political structures. The return of some 665,000 prisoners-of-war from Russia added Bolshevik propaganda to their anger and defiance. Attempts to send returning soldiers to debriefing camps, Ersatz units, or back to the front resulted in mutinies and widespread desertion. The prolonged conflict and the government’s abject failure to address economic problems further fanned the flames of discontent and revolt. Strikes and unrest plagued both Germany and Austria-Hungary. 


------


http://spartacus-educational.com/GERrevolution.htm
	Ebert gave permission for the publishing of a Social Democratic Party leaflet that attacked the activities of the Spartacus League, led by Karl Liebknecht, Rosa Luxemburg, Leo Jogiches and Clara Zetkin: "The shameless doings of Karl Liebknecht and Rosa Luxemburg besmirch the revolution and endanger all its achievements. The masses cannot afford to wait a minute longer and quietly look on while these brutes and their hangers-on cripple the activity of the republican authorities, incite the people deeper and deeper into a civil war, and strangle the right of free speech with their dirty hands. With lies, slander, and violence they want to tear down everything that dares to stand in their way. With an insolence exceeding all bounds they act as though they were masters of Berlin."(10)


did they want a German civil war after the revolution? Ebert socialists vs. Spartacus communists? a typcial strategy for them is a series of splits driving each side more and more into radicalism


	...Heinrich Ströbel, a journalist based in Berlin believed that some leaders of the Spartacus League overestimated their support: "The Spartakist movement, which also influenced a section of the Independents, succeeded in attracting a fraction of the workers and soldiers and keeping them in a state of constant excitement, but it remained without a hold on the great mass of the German proletariat. The daily meetings, processions, and demonstrations which Berlin witnessed... deceived the public and the Spartakist leaders into believing in a following for this revolutionary section which did not exist." (11)


maybe the Spartacists didn't have enough support for a civil war?

the same kind of thing happened in Russia: socialists take over in feburary revolution, then Lenin and Okhrana splits them and the more radical socialists take over

what exactly was Lenin thinking with civil war? one is to remove opposition, radicalize some more, discredit opposition (whites called monarchists)

executions of Liebknecht and Luxemburg led to violence and protests, maybe galvanize people and give it another go. I think Germany started seeing more radical right-wing elements (Freikorps) active around this time too? And so the government becomes more radical right and nazi, I guess some might have thought this would galvanize the left in Germany and create another chance for a communist revolution. There are parallels between fascist nazi government and Ludendorff gov, which helped bring about the Germany revolution. Apparently, this was abandoned and the nazi government was instead used to bring socialism across half of Europe via the soviet army (was this the "socialism in one country" debate?)


so maybe plan for German revolution goes like this:

start unpopular war to turn Germans, especially soldiers, against the government. Have socialist leaders at forefront of anti-war movement.

At this point, radicalized people as well as reasonable people hate the government and want the war over and government gone. Right I guess still supports government and war.

Start a socialist revolution that reasonable people not hooked on socialist propaganda can support, get your people in.

Split the people you can't reach (reasonable people) and the people under your thumb. So this would be the SDP types who just wanted a republic and war over, cordon them off (under Ebert, presumably), pit them against marxists in spartacus league. Then start a civil war to galvanize people, get more communists active and set up communist state.

Kindof what happened in Russia.


Why can't just do a radical communist revolution from the start? figure many different people opposed to government and simply wouldn't support radicals. Setting up radical rev from the start opens up opportunity for less radical revolutionary groups to succeed instead. A series of splits seems to be the better way to radicalize people--e.g. Repub-Dem split radicalizes poeple, then there are tea-party Repubs vs. "moderate Repubs" to radicalize even more, etc. A political fight always makes people dumber and easier to control.


how did they keep the German revolution going even after Weimer republic set up? I guess get people worried the new government wasn't doing enough to change things, or was still imperialist, or in-bed with whatever boogeyman German citizens were supposed to oppose, or just corrupt. And can play this up while people are still in a revolutionary mood. This is basically what happened in Russia, Lenin would just write in Pravda how Kerensky was in bed with all the Western imperialist bankers and such. And Kerensky of course did an awful job of gaining people's trust, giving what they want (peace), and stopping the Bolsheviks.


Why no socialist revolution in France? I guess the mutinees were stopped, and trials of Malvy and others could have made more complicated. dunno if 1917 would have made sense for a French socialist revolution.


was a socialist revolution attempted in Italy? ignorant on this. Austria-Hungary?

there was also the events of 1919--global socialsm try 2?


very important is how many people were converted to marxist thinking during the war? and how? they would want as many people turned marxist as possible. Can see how they used the war for that--they blamed the war on capitalist greed, and I guess this was convincing for some. They made the war awful, motivating people to act to solve this problem, and introduced marxism as the solution. So this is a way to create more marxist activists. Throughout all of this they want people to believe the real boogeyman is not the governments starting the war but shady capitalists manipulating events to start the war behind the scenes (or something like that? see that "shady cabal of boogeymen" idea in their propaganda today. They could also blame the war on the system of capitalism itself.) Clearly they spread a lot of marxist propaganda in the war, especially to soldiers.


so:

did marxists try to start a civil war in Germany? (with 1919 revolution I guess so)
how did bolshevist ideas spread and how far?

What did Leibknecht and Luxemburg say about the Weimer republic and Ebert? (parallels to Lenin and Kerensky?)


well there's this:

http://spartacus-educational.com/GERspartacus.htm
	The Spartacus League published a leaflet that claimed: "The Ebert-Scheidemann government intends, not only to get rid of the last representative of the revolutionary Berlin workers, but to establish a regime of coercion against the revolutionary workers." It is estimated that over 100,000 workers demonstrated against the sacking of Eichhorn the following Sunday in "order to show that the spirit of November is not yet beaten."


Ebert vs communist fight evident in a lot of this, pretty clear in 1919...


------


http://www.historytoday.com/richard-cavendish/spartacist-uprising-berlin

Keil rebellion set up workers councils in Russian model of soviets

	
	Like Liebknecht, she was sent to prison for treason in 1916. She did not share his approval of the Bolsheviks, but called for a dictatorship of the proletariat. She and Liebknecht were both released from prison in 1918 and started the Red Flag (Rote Fahne) newspaper. At the end of the year a conference of the Spartacist League, socialists and communists founded the Communist Party of Germany, with Liebknecht and Luxemburg as the leaders.

	This was almost immediately followed by an uprising in Berlin against Ebert’s regime, with encouragement from Soviet Russia. Luxemburg initially opposed it, but joined in after it began and it was supported by the Red Flag. The Berlin police chief, a radical sympathiser who had just been dismissed, supplied weapons to protesters who erected barricades in the streets and seized the offices of an anti-Spartacist socialist newspaper. Calls for a general strike brought thousands of demonstrators into the centre of the city, but the Revolution Committee, which was supposed to be leading the uprising, could not agree what to do next. Some wanted to continue with the armed insurgency, others started discussions with Ebert. Attempts to get army regiments in Berlin to join the revolt failed.


why did army regiments not join? I guess this is one reason why they would want to spread bolshevik propaganda and mutiny among soldiers, to prepare for this.

but basically problem with 1919 uprising was just not enough support for communism. Maybe kill Libeknecht and Luxemburg, crack down to galvanize and keep underground communist movement going.



------


if French army mutinees of 1917 were organized by Bolsheviks, what would the reason be?

not really sure

France was already a republic, would be harder to get a revolution


https://schoolworkhelper.net/effects-of-world-war-i-on-france/


france was devestated after war, highest percentage of casualities, hundreds of thousands disabled. I think their plight was mostly blamed on Germany, and French politicians did a lot to make the Versailles treaty happen.


https://bigsiteofhistory.com/the-impact-of-world-war-one-in-france-1918-1928-the-democracies/
	France wanted revenge on Germany in every possible way. The French tried to extract reparations to the last possible sum, undeterred by the arguments of economists that Germany could not pay. But France insisted even more on keeping Germany isolated in international relations and without the physical means to wage war.


http://www.worldology.com/Europe/world_war_1_effect.htm
	Before WWI: Still experiencing political upheaval, but also re-establishing itself as a power after a century where it suffered major defeats (Napoleonic Wars, Franco-Prussian War). Expanded empire by becoming a leading colonizer of Africa. Pre-occupied with the German threat and competition. Interested in regaining territory lost during Franco-Prussian War. Strikes alliances with Russia and UK to hem in Germany.
During WWI: Immediately lost ground to the invading Germans, but halted their progress early in the war, keeping the front lines just inside their eastern borders. Fought successful campaigns against the Germans in Africa and the Ottoman Empire in the Middle East.
After WWI: Although a victor (regaining territory along France/German border lost during Franco-Prussian War), utterly devastated by the trench warfare fought against the Germans on French lands. Suffered a high loss of life, destroyed industrial region and economic devastation. France did gain additional territories though. In addition to lands along the Rhine (from Germany), also gained part of Germany’s African territories, and multiple territories in former Ottoman Empire (Middle East).


part of why France suffered a lot is that war was fought on their soil. Same thing for Russia. I guess one reason easy to blame Germany for the war--initial push pushed front out to countries around Germany, who would suffer a bit more than Germany for war for that reason.


Was a socialist revolution ever planned for France? Lenin if I remember right mostly just lumped them in with England as imperialists


well there was this in 1968:

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/May_1968_events_in_France
	The unrest began with a series of student occupation protests against capitalism, consumerism, American imperialism and traditional institutions, values and order. It then spread to factories with strikes involving 11 million workers, more than 22% of the total population of France at the time, for two continuous weeks.


would guess socialists built up power in France, Okhrana had a lot of influence before WW1


international socialism journal says:

http://isj.org.uk/the-mass-strike-in-the-first-world-war/
	On the eve of war important defeats laid the ground for a shift to the right by the unions. In 1914 the French rail and textile workers’ unions opted for a moderate line of slow recruitment of members. Others were drawn to parliamentary reformism with half of trade union officials running for elected office, 40 percent of them being elected as socialists.21 However, the pre-war battles had also created a tradition of more radical syndicalist organisation in the workplaces.


Socialist review guy says French Army mutinies could have led to a revolution but it was "deflected:"

http://socialistreview.org.uk/393/revolution-trenches
	In April 1917 when the Americans joined the war almost half the French army overstayed home leave, deserted or mutinied, often singing the Internationale in protest at the war’s continuation. Subsequently general Petain kept the mutineers out of any major battles for almost a year and regained their loyalty by meeting many of their demands for longer leave and better food. With the help of the French Social Democrats he was able to deflect the drive to revolution.


more from ISJ:


http://isj.org.uk/the-mass-strike-in-the-first-world-war/
	The momentum of mass strikes

	France, a struggle thwarted

	During the course of 1916 France saw a major strike wave notable for the involvement of women workers. Most of the strikes were spontaneous reactions to grievances with little coordination. Female munitions workers at de Dion in Puteaux struck for 11 days in the summer of that year. The socialist armaments minister, Albert Thomas, did a deal with employers to cut wages to allow for the additional costs (such as nursery provision) of employing women workers. This sparked a strike at Wilcoq-Regnault over the downward manipulation of bonuses. By late 1916 and the first quarter of 1917 women were the majority of strikers fighting back against price rises, overwork and bullying foremen.59 While these strikes may appear to be purely economic, they occurred in the context of the French socialists’ co-option into the government during the war and also laid the ground for the events of 1917.

	In the spring of 1917 women seamstresses struck for 11 days winning a half day off on Saturdays. This strike became known to troops taking part in the huge mutiny at Chemin des Dames, with one machine gunner writing home, “We are doing like the Midinettes”, referring to the women textile workers.60 May Day rallies cheered the Russian Revolution. Some 10,000 building workers went on a one-day strike and in August there was a general strike of shoe workers, also about Saturday working. The Parisian textile workers had shown the way. Syndicalist activists in the Loire had long been arguing for a general strike and against the appeasement by the CGT. However, in November their plans were pre-empted when the government decided to send an anti-war union activist, Clovis Andrieu, to the front. The workers’ response was rapid and up to 200,000 took strike action spreading from the steel works in Unieux to Le Creusot and Lyon. After ten days the strikers secured a government announcement that Andrieu was only on leave.


ISJ says French mutineers were inspired in party by workers striking at home.


	...On 11 May Renault delegates voted for an immediate strike both for pay and for the government to announce its war aims, a demand popular among those opposed to an offensive war. Within two days the strike spread to the Peugeot and Citroën plants to include a total of 200,000 workers. Strike rallies at Billancourt ended with cries of “Down with war!”63 This unleashed the fury of the metal workers’ union with one full-time official condemning the strike for putting the country at risk in the context of a new German offensive. On 16 May the union leaders gave an unconditional surrender to the new armaments minister; Renault dismissed the strike leaders and 146 workers were sent to the front.


May 1918 strikes were large, 200K workers, had anti-war sentiment.

"a struggle thwarted"--maybe a socialist revolution was planned for France, but it didn't work


------

Austria had some major strikes, insurrection:


http://isj.org.uk/the-mass-strike-in-the-first-world-war/
	After the October Russian Revolution the favourite slogan among Viennese workers became “Speak Russian”,64 while Social Democrats held peace rallies marked by stormy debates. On 14 January the bread and flour ration was cut. Workers at Daimler in Wiener Neustadt launched a political strike for peace—four days later 113,000 workers were out in Vienna, 125,000 in Lower Austria and 750,000 in Austria-Hungary. The action spread to armaments, metal workers, rail and print trades, shop workers and seamstresses from the “grand” fashion houses. In the course of three weeks up to 4 February 1918 some 1 million workers walked out, coinciding with a mutiny of soldiers in Judenburg.65 The explicitly political nature of the strike is emphasised by Julius Braunthal: “All who struck in the factories…had the common desire to end the war at once. All were indignant at the demands of…the imperialists upon the Russian Revolution at Brest Litovsk”


but what came of it? not knowledgable on Austrian history


	...One day after the war started the Vienna social democrat paper, Arbeiter–Zeitung, defended its support for the war by speaking of the “holy cause of the German people”.67 Its own holy cause was to secure the state and that is exactly what it delivered, by taking the leadership of strikes and hollowing out their political element. However, this was only done after the demands for bread evolved into calls for peace while textile and munitions workers walked out together. 


another "reformist"/Kerensky type?


------


why did bionnio rosso fizzle out? it looked it it could have led to a Russian-style socialist revolution. 


ISJ on italy is itnteresting:


http://isj.org.uk/the-mass-strike-in-the-first-world-war/
	The PSI had been formed in 1892 and initially contained reformist and revolutionary elements.


guessing "reformists" are like Ebert, Kerensky and "revolutionary" are like Luxemburg and Lenin?


there was a "red Week" in Italy in June 1914 before the "two red years." Anarchists and anti-capitalists led protests, fired on by police, led to general strike and port of Ancona was held by a "rebel army."


	...On 5 August in Turin a crowd of 40,000 had greeted Menshevik and Social Revolutionary speakers from Russia with cries of “Viva Lenin!” However, it was to be the bread supply that sparked the mass strike in the city. Women were already queuing for bread for long periods of time as well as working 12-hour shifts in the factories. When, on 21 August, 80 bakeries put up signs saying “Out of Bread”, women and children marched to the city hall, angry that the bakers still had flour for expensive sweet rolls for the rich.70 The women’s protest led to 2,000 railway workers striking, saying they would not work without food. The next day the strike wave was joined by the metal workers, Fiat, the Projectile Arsenal and vehicle manufacturer Diatto-Frejus. On the evening of 22 August barricades went up in working class areas and handmade bombs were thrown at the police and army sent in to quell the protests.


	By now the dynamic of economic and political demands had been set in train. One Diatto-Frejus striker described the scenes:

    	We stopped work and gathered outside the factory gate shouting…”We want bread.” The boss…was very worried and addressed the workers with words of milk and honey…”I’ll telephone military authorities straightaway and order you a lorryful of bread.” The workers fell silent for a while and then all together, they cried, “We couldn’t give a damn about the bread! We want peace! Down with the profiteers! Down with the war!”71


major strike, bread shortage, with violence and Leninist and anti-war streak in Itilay August 1917


	The PSI and CGL called on the workers to give up “further useless violence”.


PSI and CGL the "reformists" and "compromisers" holding the "revolutionaries" back?


	...On 24 August crowds marched to the centre of Turin to be met by machine guns and tanks deployed by the authorities. In the course of the next four days 1,500 workers were arrested and 50 shot dead. Turin was isolated and then crushed by the military while the leaders of the PSI and CGL stood aside. Lenin called the events part of the “development of world revolution”.72 Once again a major city had seen a mass strike of insurrectionary proportions in which the economic became political. However, Turin was a city isolated without a revolutionary organisation vital to break the hostility of the unions, the PSI and the centralised power of the state.


Turin strike didn't end in revolution, but did end in police crack-down and protestors and I guess galvanized workers some more. Lenin says part of "development of world revolution."


------


http://isj.org.uk/the-mass-strike-in-the-first-world-war/
	The immediate response to the war in Germany was a lull in strike action. In 1915 there were just 141 strikes involving 13,000 participants.73 The following year the number of strikes increased by 70 percent with the number of strikers up tenfold.74 Early in 1916 there had been food riots mainly by women and young people. The Berlin police reported that, “the number of housewives who are openly expressing their discontent is growing all the time”.75 On May Day the revolutionary left organised anti-war protests in Dresden, Jena, Hanau and Berlin, where 10,000 demonstrated. The latter led to the arrest of anti-war revolutionary Karl Liebknecht, who was sentenced to two and a half years in prison. This precipitated an overtly political strike for his release by 55,000 engineers, called by Berlin shop stewards.


unrest increasing as war went on, socialist revolutionaries at forefront of anti-war movement


Berlin and Leipzig strikes in APril 1917 called for peace, universal suffrage, and release of Richard Muller (who was he)?


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Richard_M%C3%BCller_(socialist)
	When the First World War started, the social-democrats and the union leaders decided to collaborate with the imperial government and to support the war-movement. The lathe-operators, however maintained a left wing viewpoint and criticized this nationalist turn of the socialist and trade union movement and started wildcat strikes.

	From 1916 to 1918, these strikes became a mass-movement which substantially challenged the political support for the world-war. Müller, as the head of an organization called the "Revolutionary Stewards", was the leading figure behind these mass-strikes.[3] Müller was arrested and drafted into the military three times, but he always managed to find a way out and return his political work.


so Muller lead workers strikes that turned into "mass movements"

I guess they keep doing these strikes to split business owners and workers


	After the January-Strike in 1918 a big wave of repression hit the anti-war-movement. Müller and his circle decided to plan an armed uprising within the next months. Preparations began quite slowly, but gained speed in the fall of 1918, when the military catastrophe for Germany became more and more obvious to the public. Müller and the shop-stewards started secret conferences that involved Karl Liebknecht and his spartacist league but also some representatives of the Independent Social Democratic Party of Germany (USPD) who had split from SPD because they opposed the war. Liebknecht in these meetings pushed for action, but Müller and his comrades had a more pragmatic way of organizing things. In order to secure the success of the revolution, they wanted to avoid premature actions at all costs.


started plotting violent communist revolution after "wave of repression" in Jan 1918. WOrked with Leibknecht and spartacist league, some from UPSD. Muller wanted to wait for right time.


	Although the Berlin Coalition of Müller's revolutionary stewards, the spartacists and the USPD was the best-prepared group, the Revolution itself started spontaneously as a mutiny within the German war-fleet. When news about these events came to Berlin, the revolutionaries sped up their preparations and called for action on 9 November. The shop-stewards, who were the only leftist group with a widespread network in the factories, called for a general strike and armed demonstrations formed to enter the city center.


Muller organized strikes after Keil mutiny via shop-stewards, who had a "network in the factories."

the way author says it, Muller was supposed to be head of state after revolution but Ebert snatched it from him.

involved with communists and did some communist agitation


	...Within the KPD, Müller became Leader of the "Reichsgewerkschaftszentrale", the KPD's central on union affairs. Müller was responsible for the communist agitation and politics within the German unions. He lost this job in March 1921 when he criticised a failed communist uprising in Thuringia. In his views the action was premature and caused by police provocation. But the KPD central committee did not like independent critics within the party and tried to get rid of Müller. Due to an Intervention of Lenin and Trotsky on the Third World-Congress of the Communist International they had to accept the re-integration of Müller and other critics into the KPD. But when fights within the party started over again later, Müller and his faction lost support from Moscow and left the party.[6]


what's going on here

Lenin intervenes to keep Muller in german communist party


Muller sounds well-connected, knew what was going on

wrote history book on German revolution

went into real-estate


https://www.marxists.org/archive/lenin/works/1921/jul/20d.htm

Lenin doing some communist business with Muller, not really sure what's going on


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Emil_Barth

another shop-steward leader, in "council of the people's deputies," opposed Ebert and complained about him.


	...While the former two USPD commissioners were moderate and interested in conciliation with the MSPD, Barth was the most left-wing, associated with Karl Liebknecht, who refused to serve on the Council because it had a non-revolutionary majority. That same day, 10 November, Barth first acceded to Ebert's plan to place the revolutionary soldiers back under the command of their (counter-revolutionary) officers, but then changed his position in a drawn-out but stormy speech later that evening. The soldiers should not submit to the old "discipline" of their officers. Many heeded Barth's call, and the revolution gained momentum during November.


I guess he tried to foment mutiny in the army even after the revolution. Would be the thing to do to prepare for 1919 rebellion, although apparently they didn't get enough of the army on their side.


	Although he became somewhat more moderate by the end of 1918, Barth had always been the Council's most radical member, calling on workers, for instance, not to 'debase the revolution to a movement for wages,' since that would merely ameliorate conditions, making fundamental change less likely (in an article in Die Rote Fahne, 28 November 1918). In 1920 Barth published his memoirs as From the Workshop of the Revolution, in which he claimed that the USPD had worked toward fomenting revolution against the German war machine already years earlier, and portrayed himself somewhat grandiosely as a major leader. That book was later (for instance in the 1925 Dolchstoss-Trial) used as evidence that the left had undermined the war effort.


wanted workers to be poor so they could be motivated to overthrow government. Claimed he was major leader of secret USPD work to foment revolution against German government during war, book used as evidence that left undermined war effort.


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Revolutionary_Stewards

wanted "worker's councils" instead of parliament, organized strikes for German revolution


	The Stewards were a crucial force in organizing the January Strike of 1918, which was centred on Berlin, the Ruhr, Saxony, Hamburg and Kiel[3]:22 and in which strikers demanded the end of the war through a negotiated peace and a democratisation of the empire. They were in part inspired by the success achieved by the communist bolshevists under Lenin and Trotsky in the Russian October Revolution only a few months earlier. For this reason, the strikes were also directed against plans of annexation, which Central Powers Germany and Austria-Hungary were pursuing in ongoing peace negotiations with Soviet Russia in Brest-Litovsk. The strikers demanded fundamental political changes within Germany as well as a just peace agreement with Russia that did not include territorial claims by the German Empire against the "New Russia". These demands were not met by the Supreme Army Command (or Oberste Heeresleitung) and the imperial government of Chancellor Georg von Hertling.


also rallied against Brest-Litovsk--did they actually want to stop it? you'd think a lot of Bolsheviks would. Lenin was weird about it.

duked it out with Ebert/SDP over control of workers councils


	...They thus called for an Executive Committee (Aktionsausschuss) of the workers' and soldiers' councils to be set up in parallel to the Rat der Volksbeauftragten and that would be under the control of the stewards. Its powers were to be left deliberately vague.[5]:115 Emil Barth, who was presiding over the assembly, then made a tactical error by giving a long-winded speech rather than moving directly to the vote. Listeners, including Ebert, were able to deduce the Stewards' intentions from what Barth said. Ebert made another speech, declaring that the committee was superfluous, but if it was to be set up, it must be made up equally of SPD and USPD just like the Rat der Volksbeauftragten. When Barth said that no SPD delegate must sit on the committee, the assembly exploded with protest, in particular from the soldiers' councils.


interesting

Barth supposed to the "the radical guy" of the revolutionaries? Can split revolutionaries and reformers mostly by pissing off reformers while presumably revolutionaries would quietly disagree sometimes and apologize for him.

I guess the spartacus league was more about organizing people while the shop-stewards were more like a shady network


------


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bavarian_Soviet_Republic

German revolution breifly led to Bavarian soviet republic, leaders tyranical and incompetent, crushed by Freikorps shortly afterward. Hitler might have been a member?

some weird shit going on here

first impression is this would mostly piss-off the German right. Wikipedia at least paints it as almost a joke.

they didn't spend much time on their flag

lasted a little over 3 weeks



------


https://books.google.com/books?id=LHoA4psTCp4C&printsec=frontcover&dq=%22Chemin+des+Dames%22+mutiny+Russian+OR+bolshevik+OR+socialist+OR+marxist&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwiL_NjLwM7XAhXDQd8KHR1xBC04ZBDoAQhDMAU#v=onepage&q=Chemin%20des%20Dames&f=false


maybe this book has more info on revolutions after ww1?

doesn't talk about french 1917 mutinies in context of revolutionary wave



...


any good sources on any of this?

https://books.google.com/books?id=iagWb0Pc2PgC&printsec=frontcover&dq=the+german+revolution&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwibturZ187XAhWEy4MKHVHbAHkQ6AEIJjAA#v=onepage&q=Lenin&f=false

"THe German Revolution" by Broue seems off, only skimmed a bit though

see the writing style of assuming how people are thinking (Lenin) without really backing it up



this one from 1922 is free:

https://books.google.com/books?id=na7RAAAAMAAJ&printsec=frontcover&dq=the+german+revolution&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwibturZ187XAhWEy4MKHVHbAHkQ6AEILDAB#v=onepage&q=the%20german%20revolution&f=false


...


https://books.google.com/books?id=v2b532ggXp0C&printsec=frontcover&dq=Kiel+%22shop+stewards%22+%22revolutionary+stewards%22&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwj5mvHZ8eDXAhURMd8KHeRNARsQ6AEIRDAF#v=onepage&q=Kiel%20stewards&f=false

"The Third Revolution"


this book any good?


...

maybe this good too:


https://www.amazon.com/German-Revolution-Communist-Rebellion-1918-1919/dp/1610010167/ref=sr_1_1?s=books&ie=UTF8&qid=1511234330&sr=1-1&dpID=51hrgdOi3HL&preST=_SY291_BO1,204,203,200_QL40_&dpSrc=srch
	There are two books in this collection, both of which are quite interesting in their own way.

	The first is The German Revolution by Ralph Lutz, who wrote a very detailed account of the events shortly after the Spartacist Uprising was crushed by the new Social Democratic government in Germany. Lutz himself is obviously sympathetic to the Council Communists, and his level of detail is excruciating at times to read, but this gives a very thorough rundown of the play-by-play events of the German Revolution of 1918. It's one of the least-written about events in German history, especially in light of its importance, and well-worth reading for that reason alone.

	The second is far shorter but better. It's a pamphlet put together by American trade unionist and Communist Party leader William Z. Foster called 'The Revolutionary Crisis of 1918-1921', which he wrote based on his travels in Western Europe reporting to the Trade Union Education League (TUEL). His account of the German revolution is fantastic in its conclusions but a little short. More interesting, however, is his writings on Italy and the early emergence of fascism. When Foster wrote this piece, Mussolini had not taken power. It's an interesting snapshot of history seeing early communist attitudes towards fascism before the March on Rome in 1922.




https://kb.osu.edu/dspace/bitstream/handle/1811/45698/thesis_formatted_final.pdf;jsessionid=1EC93B23678B51E73B4A8B20E9FE5AEF?sequence=1


maybe some sources in this guys thesis


https://wwi.lib.byu.edu/index.php/Diaries,_Memorials,_Personal_Reminiscences

some primary sources here



https://books.google.com/books?id=QtwzDwAAQBAJ&pg=PT86&dq=%22and+giving+constant+advice+and+directions+to+kun+by+Radio%22&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwjQ-Mr3rtzWAhXGZVAKHYO6CVUQ6AEIJjAA#v=onepage&q=%22and%20giving%20constant%20advice%20and%20directions%20to%20kun%20by%20Radio%22&f=false


this has a section on communist revolutions

says Lenin send funds and jewels to Bela Kun by secret courier and was in constant communication with him by radio. The Hungary soviet was the only soviet republic which lasted for more than a blip after WWI, and apparently after this the soviets decided on socialism in one country.





------



https://books.google.com/books?id=QtwzDwAAQBAJ&pg=PT86&dq=%22and+giving+constant+advice+and+directions+to+kun+by+Radio%22&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwjQ-Mr3rtzWAhXGZVAKHYO6CVUQ6AEIJjAA#v=onepage&q=%22and%20giving%20constant%20advice%20and%20directions%20to%20kun%20by%20Radio%22&f=false
	The only Communist government installed in any European state for more than a brief period was the Bela Kun Government of Hungary, which held power from March 21, 1919, to August 1, 1919. Lenin did his utmost to help this government to survive, sending funds and jewels by secret couriers, and giving constant advice and directions to Kun by radio.


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hungarian_Soviet_Republic
	For the Social Democrats, an alliance with the KMP not only increased their standing with the common people, but also gave them a potential link to the increasingly powerful Russian Communist Party, as Kun had ties with prominent Russian Bolsheviks. On 23 March, Lenin gave an order to Béla Kun, that Social Democrats must be removed from the power, thereby Hungary will be transform into a real communist state, thus the "dictatorship of the proletariat" will rule it.[10] Accordingly, the Communists started to purge the Social Democrats from the government on the next day.



seems pretty clear this soviet republic was installed by the Bolsheviks



https://www.amazon.com/Bela-Kun-Hungarian-Soviet-Republic/dp/B0006BQMSC


there was also a Slovak Soviet Republic?


Slovak Soviet Republic, Hungary Soviet Republic, and Bavarian Soviet Republic all had the same flag and national anthem...



https://books.google.com/books?id=QtwzDwAAQBAJ&pg=PT86&dq=%22and+giving+constant+advice+and+directions+to+kun+by+Radio%22&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwjQ-Mr3rtzWAhXGZVAKHYO6CVUQ6AEIJjAA#v=onepage&q=%22and%20giving%20constant%20advice%20and%20directions%20to%20kun%20by%20Radio%22&f=false
	...But the Soviet Union had no common frontier with Hungary, and could not give direct military aid to Kun. In the absence of direct land communications, the Hungarian Soviet government collapsed. Its cheif achievement, indeed, was to teach the Soviet Government that it would find it difficult to sustain successfully Communist revolutions in countires which were not Russia's immediate neighbors, and that it was strategically advisable to try to extend the area controlled from Moscow by conquering regions adjacent to the Soviet Union, before trying to control more distant areas.



seems right. They had more success in Ukraine

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ukrainian_Soviet_Socialist_Republic

and China than in Germany, Hungary, Italy, etc.

I guess a problem is once a civil war is started to install a communist government, they often need an army to come back it up. Like they didn't have enough support from the German army. Basically communism was too unpopular and they realized they had to install it by force.