




poincare:


https://archive.org/stream/recentrevelation01geor/recentrevelation01geor_djvu.txt
	The name of Georges Louis, Political Director of the Quai d'Orsay and later the successor of Bompard as Ambassador to Russia, is far better known after his death than during his life, for the closing scenes of his long career have become the theme of embittered controversy. His champions opened the attack with a little volume entitled Poincare a-t-il voulu la guerre? in which Gouttenoire de Toury argued that the Ambassador had been recalled because he attempted to counter-work the bellicose policy of Russian and French Imperialists.


https://archive.org/stream/fallofthedynasti012755mbp/fallofthedynasti012755mbp_djvu.txt
	"I have the impression," Sazonov wrote in 1910 to his minister in Belgrade, N. H. de Hartwig, "that Austria-Hungary, despite the German brotherhood in arms, is on her last legs . . . Serbia's promised land lies within the orbit of present-day Austria-Hungary . . . Under these circumstances it is a matter of vital importance for Serbia to put herself by hard and patient work in the position of readiness necessary to face the inevitable outbreak of future war."

	...The gravest repercussions of the Balkan conflicts were indirect. Germany, fearing a new Balkan attack on the Ottoman Empire that might lead to its final dismemberment, drew closer to Austria whose Balkan policy had earlier inspired serious misgivings and with the agreement of the Young Turks, dispatched a German general, Liman von Sanders, to reorganize the Ottoman Army. This move infuriated and frightened the Russians: if German military power with the connivance of a puppet Turkish government established itself astride the Dardanelles, it would be a threat not only to Russia's ambitions but even to her security. An imperial crown council held in St Petersburg on February 21, 1914 came to the gloomy conclusion that only a general European war would enable Russia to realize her "historic aims" i.e. seizure of Constantinople and control of the straits.


https://books.google.com/books?id=H2ELAAAAYAAJ&pg=PA173&lpg=PA173
	The Russian Ambassador at Paris to Sasonoff. Telegram, May 5-18, 1912.

	...Several newspapers, chiefly of an extreme or opposition tendency which have always been hostile to Russia, are repeating their attacks on Russia and on me personally.

	The effort is clearly visible to give the incident a political character and to explain our dissatisfaction with Georges Louis, the French Ambassador in St. Petersburg, by the assumption, that Russia apparently wishes to pursue aggressive policy towards Turkey and that she has in this encountered resistance on the part of the French ambassador. It is known that several papers, which are writing in this vein, receive subsidies from the Turkish Embassy which distributes considerable sums among the local press.


https://www.gwern.net/docs/terrorism/1989-andrew.pdf
    Like much else in the study of contemporary intelligence, KGB and GRU foreign operations are commonly interpreted with almost total disregard for historical perspective. "Active measures" are widely believed to be an invention of Soviet intelligence. In reality, though the KGB has been responsible for an enormous expansion in the use made of them, their effectiveness was at least as great in tsarist times. There is no convincing evidence that any KGB-inspired press campaign in the West as been as effective as the tsarist attempting to persuade Western investors, all of whom later lost their money, to ignore the risks of investing in Russia. Before World War I, every Paris newspaper of note save for the socialist L'Humanite was successfully bribed to support tsarist government loans. By 1914, 25 percent of France's foreign investment was in Russia


https://archive.org/details/fallofthedynasti012755mbp
	...To neutralize the chronic protest of French Socialists and Liberals against its operations on French soil, the Okhrana bribed French newspapers and journalists of the right who were willing to follow a pro-Russian line. According to an expose of the Okhrana written in 1919 by one of its former senior officials, V. K. Agafonov, it financed a journalists' club in Paris and paid regular subsidies to several important French newspapers, including the Echo de Paris, the Gaulois, and the Figaro. The last-named organ, according to Agafonov, for a while received 24,000 rubles-about $10,000 monthly from the Okhrana. 

	..."Do not forget," Izvolsky once wrote his nominal chief in St Petersburg, "that Poincare has to struggle with very influential elements in his own party which are generally hostile to Russia and openly preach that France must not be dragged into any war arising out of Balkan affairs." To the degree that the Russian propaganda-credit was likely to aid Poincare in his "struggles," and thereby to help his political career, it came perilously near to being a personal bribe to him, as well as to the French journalists who were actually to pocket the funds.


https://archive.org/stream/recentrevelation01geor/recentrevelation01geor_djvu.txt
	This grave indictment was pressed home in the volume entitled Georges Louis, by the veteran journalist, Ernest Judet, with the aid of the diplomatist's papers, and an almost hysterical eulogy of 'le plus droit et le plus adroit de nos Ambassadeurs' is combined with passionate denunciations of his enemies at Paris and Petrograd. 'He was sacrificed to a desperado eager to set Europe aflame in consolation for his mistakes, and to a Minister on his knees before the insatiable demands of Panslavism.' The conspiracy to bring about his recall was with difficulty frustrated in 1912 by Ribot, Bourgeois and other friends at home, but was successfully renewed early in 1913, when he was replaced by the fire-eater Delcasse. The prime mover, in the opinion of the Ambassador and his biographer, was Izvolsky, while Sazonoff and Poincare danced to his tune; for Izvolsky thirsted for the Straits, and Poincare encouraged his ally to adventures in the Near East.


https://archive.org/stream/in.ernet.dli.2015.183514/2015.183514.The-Origin-Of-The-War-Of-1914-Vol-11_djvu.txt
	As has been said, [Sazanov] was temperamental and changeable. In the succeeding days he can be seen making a series of suggestions for settling the conflict without sticking to any of them. But at this juncture it would have been difficult for him to show a spirit of accommodation and he was certainly not about to be urged to do so by the eminent personage who was soon to arrive at St. Petersburg, the President of the French Republic. 

	It fell to Viviani, as Foreign Minister, to accompany Poincare to St. Petersburg on the President’s state visit to the Tsar which had been arranged as early as January. On taking office Viviani had at once reaffirmed France’s loyalty to the alliance with Russia and given assurances to Russia that the three year term of military service would be upheld. But he possessed neither the necessary experience nor the authority to direct French foreign policy. This consequently continued to be dominated by Poincare, whom the French pacifists saw with anxiety taking the road to the allied capital for the second time in two years. As early as May Georges Louis asked Caillaux to oppose this journey as likely to have serious consequences. After the Sarajevo tragedy the danger grew, and Jaures vainly urged the Chamber to refuse the grant necessary for the visit. 

	...Following [Sazonov] about in those days was his predecessor and former chief Izvolsky who went around repeating that Russia could not evade the German challenge; that for over a year France had been surprised at the passivity shown by Russia in questions which touched her closely; and that the Dual Alliance would be in mortal danger if the Russian passivity continued. Responding to this impulsion Sazonov in the night of 22-23 July sent Austria a warning for which he had not till now gathered courage. At 4 a.m. on the 23rd he wired the Russian Charge d’ Affaires at Vienna asking him to call Berchtold’s attention ‘cordially but firmly’ to the dangerous consequences to which ‘such a step may lead if it is of a character unacceptable to the dignity of Serbia’. 

	He added that the French and English Ambassadors to Vienna had been instructed to enjoin moderation on the Government there.

	It was, as we shall see, not true that England intended to take such a step. But Poincare agreed to do so, and Viviani, in leaving St. Petersburg, wired instructions to Paris for Dumaine. They went off at 2. a.m. on 24 July.

	Sazonov’s note also arrived too late. The Russian Charge d’Affaires received it at 3 p.m. on the 23rd and went at once to the Ballplatz. But Berchtold sent a message that he was busy and could only see him next morning. At 6 p.m. on the 23td the ultimatum was in the hands of the Serbian Government. Its dispatch, as we know, had been intentionally timed so that it was received just before Poincare left Russian waters. In his farewell toast on board the France, thanking the Tsar for his welcome, Poincare amid the enthusiasm of those present said that their two countries cherished ‘the same ideal of peace in strength, honour and self-respect’. 

	...What exactly was said during the three days that the visit lasted, is something that perhaps will never be known. Georges Louis in his Carnets records Mllerand as having said; ‘I asked Poincare: “But what did you say to the Russians?” I never succeeded in making him tell.’ It should have been the duty of the Prime Minister Viviani to draft minutes of what was said in the talks, as Poincare had done on the occasion of his visit of 1912, If it was not done, there must have been good reasons for this.


https://archive.org/stream/recentrevelation01geor/recentrevelation01geor_djvu.txt
	Georges Louis, on the other hand, believed that the Franco-Russian alliance should be used only for common interests, and that the one partner had no more right to invoke it for Constantinople than the other for Alsace-Lorraine. The neglect of his warnings was speedily followed by the realisation of his fears. Germany, declared Louis, started the war, but Izvolsky supplied the pretext which she sought. The ex-Ambassador, we are told, died a broken-hearted man, while maintaining a patriotic silence to the end. 



------


Holwegg:


https://books.google.com/books?id=nAFfAr3dU_8C&pg=PA79&lpg=PA79
	The press and popular feeling played on the inevitability of a clash between Teuton and Slav. This emotive vocabulary did not seem inappropriate given the reality of the position. The Russian army's budget--independently of the extraordinary capital grants--had grown from 406 million roubles in 1907/8 to 581 million in 1913/14. Spending on the navy nearly tripled over the same period, and in 1914 exceeded that of Germany. In 1913 the Russians introduced the 'grand programme', enacted in 1914, which aimed to increase the annual contingent of recruits for the army from 455,000 to 585,000, and to expand the total number of divisions from 114.5 to 112.5. The Russian war minister accompanied these enlargements with statements calculated to stoke German anxieties. The German and Austro-Hungarian armies were already inferior to those of France and Russia by over a million men in the sumer of 1914; by 1917 the Russian army alone would be three times the Size of Germany's. The argument that, objectively, there was no chance of a Russian challenge in economic terms did not figure in the calculations on the military balance. By 1914 French loans had enabled the construction of strategic railways so that Russia's mobilization could be accelerated, and the first troops be into battle within fifteen days. German plans drawn up on 1905 rested on the then-valid assumption that Germany would have six weeks in which to deal with France before turning east: the very existence of that planning assumption, which by 1913 was demonstrably wrong, added to Germany's sense of panic. In may 1914, therefore, Moltke's advocacy of a preventative war took on greater urgency, if not more precision: 'we must wage a preventative war', he told Gottlieb von Jagow, the foreign minister, 'to conquer our opponents as long as we still have a reasonable chance in this struggle.'

	Both Jagow and Bethmann Hollweg resisted Moltke's suggestion. But the case for doing so seemed, in the self-absorbed atmosphere of Wilhelmine politics, to be growing weaker. As early as December 1912 Bethmann--who had visited Russia in that year--confessed: 'One must have a good deal of trust in God and count on the Russian revolution as an ally in order to be able to sleep at all.' 


https://archive.org/stream/in.ernet.dli.2015.183514/2015.183514.The-Origin-Of-The-War-Of-1914-Vol-11_djvu.txt
	...on 21 July Pourtalfes wrote to Bethmann Hollweg that 

		since Sazonov's return he has been very anxious about the relations between Austria-Hungary and Serbia. He told me that he had most alarming reports from London, Paris and Rome, where the attitude of Austria-Hungary was everywhere causing growing concern. , . . Sazonov seized the occasion to pour out once more in his usual manner his resentment against Austro-Hungarian policy. . . . There were, he said, powerful and dangerous forces at work ... to plunge Austria into war . , . namely Count Forgach ‘an intriguer of the worst sort’ and Count Tisza, a half madman. . . . Their aim was the annihilation of Serbia (Kaiser’s marginal note: ‘would be the best thing, too!’) ... If Austria-Hungary was determined to break the peace, she would have to reckon with Europe (Kaiser’s marginal note: ‘No! but with Russia, yes!’) . . . Russia would not be able to tolerate Austria-Hungary’s using threatening language to Serbia or taking military measures (Kaiser : ‘qui vivra verra’). ‘Russia’s policy’, said M. Sazonov, ‘is pacific but not passive.’


https://archive.org/details/reflectionsonpt100bethuoft
	Reflections on the world war
	by Bethmann Hollweg, Theobald von

	...I had already made myself acquainted with the gist of the Austrian documents, a copy of which had been communicated to Herr Zimmermann. After I had reviewed their contents the Kaiser declared that he could not let himself be under any illusion as to the gravity of the position into which the Danube Monarchy had been brought by the Greater Serbia propaganda. It was not our business, however, to advise our ally what it must do in respect of the bloody deed at Serajevo. Austria-Hungary must settle that for itself. We must all the more abstain from any direct action or advice, as we must labour with every means to prevent the Austro-Serbian dispute developing into an international conflict.


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Theobald_von_Bethmann-Hollweg
	Following the assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand in Sarajevo on 28 June 1914, Bethmann-Hollweg and his foreign minister, Gottlieb von Jagow, were instrumental in assuring Austria-Hungary of Germany's unconditional support, regardless of Austria's actions against Serbia. 


https://archive.org/details/fallofthedynasti012755mbp
	In the circumstances Grey took what he felt was the most vigorous possible action. He called in the German Ambassador, Prince Karl Lichnowsky, spoke to him frankly about his worries, and made a formal plea that Germany use its good offices in Vienna to facilitate acceptance of the Serbian reply at least as a basis for further negotiation. The whole conversation, backed by the announcement in the British press the same day that leave had been canceled in the British Navy—the personal initiative of the First Sea Lord, Winston Churchill—constituted the most explicit warning yet given not to count on British neutrality. Prince Lichnowsky, like the alert and conscientious diplomat that he was, immediately grasped its import and relayed it to Berlin with the sense of urgency that the situation called for. 

	Lichnowsky’s dispatch reached the Wilhelmstrasse at about the same moment as a message from Vienna informing the German government that Austria would declare war on Serbia the next day, or at the latest on July 29. Thereupon Bethmann-Hollweg committed either an incredible blunder, or—as Albertini and some other historians believe—an act of almost equally incredible duplicity. Acting upon instructions from the Kaiser, he forwarded to Vienna Sir Edward Grey’s suggestion about German good offices, but on his own initiative he omitted a key passage in the message he had received from the German Embassy in London which stressed the seriousness of the British warning, and he failed to indicate any official German endorsement of the suggestion; he merely asked for the Austrian views about it. He even allowed his colleague, Jagow, to call in the Austrian Ambassador, and in effect to advise him that the Austrians should pay no attention to any British suggestions that Berlin might feel obliged, for the sake of the record, to forward.


https://books.google.com/books?id=nAFfAr3dU_8C&pg=PA91
	What is striking about the 'blank cheque' is not that it was issued but that it was indeed blank. The council had made little effort to discuss the implications of what it was doing. Its decisions followed from previous events rather than from a projection as to the future. Falkenhayn wrote to Moltke expressing the view that neither he nor Bethmann Hollweg believed that Austria-Hungary would follow through the forceful language which it had so far employed. But Bethmann Holweg had done little to inform himself on precisely this point. When on 9 July he told the minister of the interior, Clemens von Delbruck, of the impending Austrian ultimatum he confessed that he had no idea of its contents; furthermore, so little was he disturbed by his own ignorance that he used it as a device to still Delbruck's alarm.


https://archive.org/details/fallofthedynasti012755mbp
	The Austrian ultimatum to Serbia, which the British Foreign Minister, Lord Grey, called the most formidable document ever addressed by one state to another, had been minutely and interminably hatched in the Vienna Foreign Office. It was finally adopted in a Joint Council of Ministers on July 19. Count Berchtold's main concern had been candidly described by the German Ambassador in a dispatch to Berlin: 

		"Were the Serbs to accept all the demands, this will be a solution not at all to his [Count Berchtold's] liking and he is turning over in his mind what demands could be made that would render acceptance by Serbia absolutely impossible." 

	Berchtold's soul-searching had already resulted in a list of conditions, the acceptance of which would have implied a revision of the Serbian constitution.


https://archive.org/details/fallofthedynasti012755mbp
	The fatalism which had increasingly gripped the chancellor had become a device to ease him of responsibility for his actions. Later in the same month he was to express the view that 'a fate greater than human power hangs over the situation in Europe and over the German people'.

	...Such an extraordinary abdication of responsibility is all the more remarkable in view of the fact that Bethmann Hollweg's calculations did not exclude the possibility of a major European war.





https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/July_Crisis#The_events_leading_to_the_Austro-Hungarian_ultimatum
	Riezler went to write in his diary that Bethmann Hollweg painted a "devastating picture" with Russia building rail-roads in Congress Poland that allow Russia to mobilize faster once the Great Military Programme was finished in 1917,[61] and that an Austro-Serbian war would probably cause a world war, "which would lead to an overthrow of the existing order", but since the "existing order was lifeless and void of ideas", such a war could only be welcomed as a blessing to Germany.


wtf


------


doing things behind Kaiser's back:


https://archive.org/stream/fallofthedynasti012755mbp/fallofthedynasti012755mbp_djvu.txt
	The Kaiser, himself, began to show agitation. Sudden and fully justified suspicion of the Wilhelmstrasse caused him to cut short his cruise. A meandering report from the Chancellor full of understatements and omissions and concluding with the news that "the diplomatic situation is not quite clear" put him in a thundering bad temper on his return to the capital, July 27.


	This was probably the decisive day of the crisis. The text of the Serbian reply to Austria's ultimatum reached the Wilhelmstrasse which had not bothered to ask for it sooner about midafternoon, along with the first foreign reactions to it. Tie document caused dismay, as it had done in Vienna, where the Ballplatz official who had himself drafted the Austrian note termed it "the most brilliant example of diplomatic astuteness" in his experience. In reasonable and moderate terms the Serbians had accepted most of the Austrian demands, formulated some reservations on others and rejected only point six, which called for the participation of Austrian police in the investigations on Serbian territory. So much reasonableness might make too great an impression on the Kaiser; he must not see the Serbian note any sooner than could be helped. The Wilhelmstrasse accordingly dawdled so long about getting the document already two days old to Potsdam that Wilhelm did not read it until the next morning--a fateful delay. 



-----


Russia mobilization:

https://books.google.com/books?id=xFgTDAAAQBAJ&pg=PA86&lpg=PA86&dq=St.+Petersburg+had+reported+that+Russia+was+not+likely+to+be+held+back&source=bl&ots=nEfA55w05z&sig=ro4mWNteQRZqavT6wgeYrFQGqAE&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwif_ozakdbWAhXDOiYKHexwCogQ6AEIKDAA#v=onepage&q=St.%20Petersburg%20had%20reported%20that%20Russia%20was%20not%20likely%20to%20be%20held%20back&f=false
	Any military preparations by Russia, even if designed to counter Austria-Hungary alone, would have been sufficient to prompt German mobilization. This is obviously true if Germany is seen as an aggressive power, already committed to European war, and certainly not disposed to pass up the opportunity of having its eastern frontier protected by Austrian operations against the Russians and so being freed to concentrate in the weest. But it is also applicable in the context of a more reactive interpretation, of Germany's self-imposed image as the tragic victim: the sense of being in a corner, the preoccupation with time which not only the mobilization timetable but also the political management of the crisis generated, combined with fear of Russia and the obligation to Austria-Hungary to make Russia's partial mobilization as intolerable to Germany as general mobilization.

	Bethmann Hollweg was nonetheless slow to realize the gravity of the criss which confronted him. On 25 July Germany's ambassador in St. Petersburg had reported that Russia was not likely to be held back by fear of domestic disorder. Despite this clear indication that the strategy of a short, sharp Austro-Serbian war would misfire, the German chancellor continued to pursue that objective.

	...And by the time that Bethmann HOlweg had apprised Austria-Hungary of Britain's view (which he took pains to point out that he did not share)--that the Serb reply was acceptable--Vienna had already rebuffed the Serbs and was preparing for war.

	...Before 28 July the message from Britain above all, but also from France and Russia, was clear: the local war must be avoided in order to prevent a major war. Bethmann Holwegg did not attempt to avoid a major war until after the local war had been initiated.



-----


another one: Lenin apparently doing the German foreign Ministry's wishes:

https://www.marxists.org/archive/lenin/works/1917/may/14.htm
